--- PAGE 1 ---

1 
 
Understanding User Perception and Intention to Use 
Smart Home for Energy Efficiency: A Survey 
 
Alona Zharova*1 and Hee-Eun Lee1 
1 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin 
Unter den Linden, 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany 
 
* - corresponding author (alona.zharova@hu-berlin.de) 
 
 
Version 06.10.2025 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Smart Home technology is increasingly seen as a solution for improving household energy 
efficiency. However, its energy-saving potential depends largely on how consumers use the system. 
To explore how user perception and intention to use Smart Home can influence energy efficiency, 
we develop a research model combining the theory of planned behavior (TPB) and the norm 
activation model (NAM), based on a comprehensive literature review. We collect data by surveying 
users of Smart Home systems (N = 363) and apply a partial least squares structural equation model 
(PLS-SEM) extended by a Random Forest algorithm to capture both linear and non-linear causal 
relationships. Results show that personal norms, shaped by a sense of responsibility and awareness 
of environmental consequences, are the strongest predictors of energy-efficient smart home use. 
Social norms and attitudes also significantly contribute to the intention to use these systems 
efficiently. Moreover, past behavior strengthens the link between personal norms and behavioral 
intention, highlighting the role of habit in shaping energy-related actions. To maximize the energysaving potential of Smart Homes, system design should focus on reinforcing personal moral norms, 
supporting long-term engagement through habit-forming features, delivering personalized feedback 
on environmental and financial outcomes, and embedding green automation defaults. Implementing 
policy mechanisms that financially reward household energy savings presents a powerful lever for 
reducing emissions through improved energy efficiency in residential buildings. 
 
Keywords: Smart Home, energy efficiency, partial least squares structural equation modeling, 
random forest, behavioral intention, theory of planned behavior, norm-activation model 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---

 
2 
 
 
 
1 
Introduction 
Mitigating climate change requires deep and rapid reductions in energy-related emissions, particularly in the residential 
building sector, which accounts for roughly 21% of global greenhouse gas emissions (IPCC, 2022). Improving energy 
efficiency in buildings is a critical lever for reducing emissions, lowering energy demand, and meeting climate targets 
(Creutzig et al., 2022). Energy consumption in a building is influenced by various factors, such as climate, characteristics 
of the building, building service systems and operations, social and economic factors, indoor environmental quality, and 
user behavior (Abrahamse & Schuitema, 2020; Wan et al. 2025; Steemers & Yun, 2009). Beyond structural retrofits and 
building code improvements, demand-side digitalization through technologies such as Smart Home systems has emerged 
as a promising tool for decarbonizing household energy use (Martin & Larsen, 2024; Casquero-Modrego et al., 2025). 
Smart Home technologies (SHT) are on the cusp of revolutionizing residential energy management by enabling the 
automated monitoring and control of household energy consumption (Saad-al-sumati et al., 2014; Sanguinetti et al., 
2018). These systems have the potential to reduce both overall consumption and peak demand (Alaa et al., 2017; Lashkari 
et al., 2019). Various features such as programmable thermostats, energy consumption analytics, or automated lighting 
systems directly contribute to reducing unnecessary energy usage and enhancing overall efficiency (Risteska Stojkoska 
& Trivodaliev, 2017; Sun & Li, 2021). Using SHT to shift the load of appliances usage to the times with more renewable 
energy in the grid is a further way to reduce carbon emissions in residential households (Zharova et al, 2024a; Zharova 
et al, 2024b). While the technical aspects of SHT and their potential to optimize energy usage have been thoroughly 
studied (Ford et al., 2017; Ji & Chan, 2019), there is a lack of understanding of the user perspective (Marikyan et al., 
2019; Sintov & Schultz, 2017). 
User behavior vastly influences how much energy is used (Schwartz et al., 2015). Behavioral changes among building 
occupants can help reduce GHG emissions in the buildings sector by up to 15% (IPCC, 2022). However, the realization 
of the energy-saving potential of SH depends on how individuals perceive, engage with, and incorporate SH systems into 
daily life (Fornara et al., 2025; Peacock et al., 2017). This also includes the consideration of the dynamic nature of 
household structures which affects the total energy consumption (Irwin, 2017). The positive impact of SH on energy 
efficiency is further dependent on how consumers are using them after adoption (Hargreaves et al., 2018; Thunshirn et 
al., 2025; Pakravan & MacCarty, 2020). 
In this paper, we develop and empirically test a behaviorally grounded research model that integrates the Theory of 
Planned Behavior (TPB) and the Norm Activation Model (NAM). Using survey data from 363 Smart Home users, we 
apply a partial least squares structural equation model (PLS-SEM), complemented by a random forest algorithm, to 
uncover both linear and non-linear drivers of energy-efficient smart home behavior. Our findings reveal that personal 
norms shaped by a sense of responsibility and awareness of environmental consequences are the strongest predictors of 
intention to use smart home systems for energy efficiency. Social influences and attitudes also play a significant role, 
while perceived behavioral control is less consequential. These results highlight the importance of aligning system design 
and policy interventions with users’ values and motivations. Unlocking the full energy-saving potential of smart homes 
will require a shift from usability-focused strategies to those that engage moral norms, support habit formation, and 
deliver personalized environmental and financial feedback. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides the theoretical background and introduces the research model; and 
Section 3 describes the data collection and methodological approach. The empirical results and their implications are 
presented in Sections 4 and 5, respectively, while Section 6 offers recommendations for research, policy, and system 
design. The paper concludes in Section 7. 
 
2 
Theoretical framework 
2.1 Key theories connecting perception, actual behavior, and behavioral intentions 
Motivations for using smart homes for energy management and behavior change can be better understood through the 
established behavioral theories. We conduct a comprehensive literature review to identify theories and models that help 
explain the relationships between user perception and intention to use Smart Home systems for energy efficiency (see 
Appendix A). The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) is the most widely used framework for describing the nexus 
between user perception and behavior. We use TPB along with the Norm Activation Model (NAM) to develop a 
theoretical framework that addresses the key factors influencing SHT usage. 

--- PAGE 3 ---

 
3 
 
 
 
The TPB, introduced by Ajzen in 1985 as an extension of Fishbein and Ajzen's earlier Theory of Reasoned Action (Ajzen, 
1985; Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975), is a foundational model for predicting individual behavior. TPB posits that behavior is 
directly influenced by behavioral intentions, which are shaped by attitudes toward the behavior, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioral control. Behavioral intention reflects an individual’s willingness to carry out a specific behavior. 
The TPB framework has been widely applied in many fields, including energy conservation studies, where it helps explain 
intentions and behaviors related to saving energy (Greaves et al., 2013; Kim & Hwang, 2020). Its frequent use in 
information systems context further underscores its relevance and utility in understanding user interactions with 
technology (Anser et al., 2020; Arkorful et al., 2020; Chen, 2020), making TPB a robust theoretical foundation for 
investigating how individuals' intentions translate into specific actions. 
NAM adds to the TPB by specifically addressing pro-environmental behaviors, making it useful for understanding actions 
aimed at sustainability (Onwezen et al., 2013; Schwartz, 1977). NAM focuses on the psychological factors behind 
altruistic and eco-friendly actions, identifying three main variables: awareness of the consequences, their ascription of 
responsibility for those consequences, and their personal norms that guide behavior (Han, 2014; Kim & Hwang, 2020). 
When combined with TPB, NAM enhances the analysis of environmental behaviors by adding depth to the understanding 
of how personal values and social responsibilities influence behavior (Kim & Hwang, 2020; Schwartz, 1977). This 
combined approach has proven effective in explaining not only general pro-social intentions but also specific energysaving actions in various contexts (Chen, 2016). The application of NAM has been further refined by suggesting its use 
as a mediator model, where awareness of environmental consequences leads individuals to feel a sense of responsibility, 
thereby motivating eco-friendly behaviors (Groot & Steg, 2009). We build on this mediator model to provide a nuanced 
understanding of how increased environmental awareness can directly influence users' ascription of responsibility 
towards energy conservation. 
2.2 Research model 
In this section, we present a research model based on TPB and NAM (Figure 1). The model examines the factors that 
influence the behavioral intention (BI) to use Smart Home systems for energy efficiency. We present the research 
hypotheses in Table 1. 
 
Figure 1. Proposed research model. 
Attitude (AT) The user’s attitude represents a person’s evaluation of a particular behavior and the feelings they have 
when performing the behavior (Ajzen, 1985). It includes the consideration of potential benefits that the person believes 
are linked to the behavior (Greaves et al., 2013). A positive attitude towards the environment has often been shown to 
significantly affect energy-saving behaviors (Kim & Hwang, 2020; Wang et al., 2014). Thus, we hypothesize that users 
who hold positive attitudes toward using smart homes for energy efficiency are more inclined to engage in this kind of 
behavior (see Table 1). 

--- PAGE 4 ---

 
4 
 
 
 
Perceived Behavioral Control (PBC) Perceived behavioral control is defined as the individual’s perception of their 
ability to perform a behavior successfully and is similar to the concept of self-efficacy (Ajzen, 1991). A user’s control 
beliefs shape their perceived behavioral control. These control beliefs include a user’s perceived ability and perceived 
difficulty of performing the behavior (Ajzen, 1991; Wang et al., 2014). Factors such as convenience, skills, time, mobility, 
and economic situation can influence energy-saving decisions (Anker-Nilssen, 2003). Thus, higher levels of perceived 
behavioral control regarding energy-saving behavior are associated with higher willingness to save energy (Oikonomou 
et al., 2009). 
Subjective Norm (SN) Subjective norm describes the influence or social pressure that individuals perceive from their 
immediate environment, especially close family members or friends, regarding a behavior (Ajzen, 1985). Social norms, 
as well as personal ethical standpoints, are found to affect residents’ energy-saving behavior (Wang et al., 2014; Webb 
et al., 2013). Hence, users who believe that people close to them support energy-saving behaviors are more likely to 
intend to engage in such behaviors. 
Awareness of Consequences (AC) Awareness of consequences refers to an individual’s perception of how their 
behavior affects others and the environment (Schwartz, 1977). People are more likely to act pro-environmentally if they 
understand the impact of their actions (Han & Hyun, 2017). Research shows that a person needs to be aware of the 
consequences of a behavior to develop feelings of responsibility and to engage in this behavior (Steg & Groot, 2010). 
Therefore, we hypothesize that users who are aware of the consequences of their energy consumption behavior develop 
more responsibility regarding the potentially positive consequences of acting pro-environmentally. 
Ascription of Responsibility (AR) Ascription of responsibility refers to someone’s belief that they are personally 
responsible for the outcomes of their behavior (Schwartz, 1977). People who see themselves as responsible for 
environmentally-related issues are more likely to support pro-environmental behaviors and engage in them (Rezaei et al., 
2019; Shin et al., 2018). Ascription of responsibility mediates the relationship between awareness of consequences and 
personal norms (Groot & Steg, 2009). Thus, we hypothesize that feelings of responsibility regarding energy consumption 
behavior activate personal norms. 
Personal Norms (PN) Personal norms refer to an individual's internal sense of moral obligation to act in a certain way 
(Schwartz, 1977). The moral obligation can act as a motivation to engage in pro-environmental behaviors (Onwezen et 
al., 2013). Research shows that personal norms influence pro-environmental behaviors (Kim & Hwang, 2020; Park & 
Ha, 2014; Zhang et al., 2017). Personal norms further mediate the relationship between ascription of responsibility and 
behavioral intention (Groot & Steg, 2009). We hypothesize that these personal norms regarding energy consumption 
behavior influence the behavioral intention to use smart homes for energy efficiency. 
Integrating TPB and NAM Combining TPB and NAM provides deeper insights into eco-friendly behavioral intentions 
(Han & Hyun, 2017; Kim & Hwang, 2020; Onwezen et al., 2013). Personal norms can influence eco-friendly behavioral 
intentions, as well as attitude, perceived behavioral control, and subjective norm (Chen, 2016; Liu et al., 2017; Park & 
Ha, 2014). Awareness of consequences and attitude are shown to have a significant and positive association with each 
other (Kim & Hwang, 2020; Meng et al., 2020). In the context of smart homes, users should tend to have more positive 
attitudes towards using Smart Homes for energy efficiency if they are aware of the environmental consequences of higher 
energy consumption. Furthermore, a causal link between subjective norms and personal norms is supported by previous 
studies (Liu et al., 2017). It is argued that subjective norms precede personal norms since the social annotations of a 
specific behavior shape the way a person develops their belief about that behavior (Kim & Hwang, 2020; Onwezen et al., 
2013). 
Past Behavior (PB) Past behavior refers to actions taken in previous similar situations (Sommer, 2011). Previous 
studies include past behavior in TPB frameworks as a predictor of behavioral intention and actual behavior (Earle et al., 
2020; Kidwell & Jewell, 2008). In some cases, past behavior is the strongest predictor of behavioral intention (Conner et 
al., 2003; Forward, 2009). Past behavior can also predict unique variance in intentions that is not linked to other TPB 
variables (Ouellette & Wood, 1998). For some studies, past behavior may be a better predictor for future behavior than 
intention (Sheeran, 2002; Wong & Mullan, 2009), which is based on the assumption that human behavior is driven by 
automatic processes rather than intentions (Sommer, 2011). 
In the context of residential energy consumption, lifestyle and habit are two further important factors (Wang et al., 2014). 
Hence, the assumption is that users who have already behaved a certain way in the past, are more likely to continue 
behaving this way. Furthermore, feedback can affect behavioral, normative, and control beliefs which may influence 
future intentions about the underlying behavior (Ajzen, 2020). Thus, we hypothesize that past behavior moderates the 
strength of the relationships between the main variables and behavioral intention. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---

 
5 
 
 
 
Table 1. Research Hypotheses 
Hypothesis 
Variable 
Theory 
H1: Attitudes toward using Smart Home for energy efficiency 
positively influence users’ behavioral intentions. 
Attitude (AT) 
TPB 
H2: Perceived behavioral control positively influences users’ 
behavioral intentions to use Smart Home for energy efficiency. 
Perceived behavioral control 
(PBC) 
TPB 
H3: Subjective norms positively influence users’ behavioral 
intentions to use Smart Home for energy efficiency. 
Subjective norm (SN) 
TPB 
H4: Awareness of consequences positively influences 
ascription of responsibility. 
Awareness of consequences 
(AC) 
NAM 
H5: Ascription of responsibility positively influences personal 
norms 
Ascription 
of 
responsibility 
(AR) 
NAM 
H6: Personal norms positively influence the behavioral 
intentions to use Smart Home for energy efficiency. 
Personal norms (PN) 
NAM 
H7: Awareness of consequences positively influences attitudes 
toward using Smart Home for energy efficiency. 
Integrating TPB and NAM 
combination of 
TPB and NAM 
H8: Subjective norms positively influence personal norms. 
Integrating TPB and NAM 
combination of 
TPB and NAM 
H9a: Past behavior moderates the effect of attitude on 
behavioral intention. 
Past behavior (PB) 
- 
H9b: Past behavior moderates the effect of perceived 
behavioral control on behavioral intention. 
Past behavior (PB) 
- 
H9c: Past behavior moderates the effect of subjective norms on 
behavioral intention. 
Past behavior (PB) 
- 
H9d: Past behavior moderates the effect of personal norms on 
behavioral intention. 
Past behavior (PB) 
- 
 
3 
Methods 
3.1 Data collection and survey design 
We develop a questionnaire based on the proposed research model and the findings from the literature review (see 
Appendix B). The online survey was conducted using LimeSurvey software. The target group were people who currently 
use Smart Home technology in their homes. Participants were recruited by sharing the survey link in online forums 
focused on topics around Smart Home (Facebook, Reddit, and various smart home forums). The questionnaire was made 
available in English and German to reach as many relevant respondents as possible within the scope of this work. Data 
collection took place between September and December 2021. A total of 466 people completed the survey (363 valid 
answers). 
Survey questions were designed to reflect each hypothesis of the research model. Multiple items were created for each 
hypothesis to accurately capture the users’ perceptions while keeping the questionnaire length reasonable. For most of 
the questions, response options were provided, and several questions offered the option for a complementary text entry. 

--- PAGE 6 ---

 
6 
 
 
 
Additionally, some questions aimed to collect information regarding the Smart Home systems in use and their 
functionalities, as well as questions regarding potential changes in users’ total energy consumption. 
To ensure participants were actual Smart Home users, the first question of the survey asked whether the participant’s 
home was equipped with a Smart Home system. A seven-point Likert scale was used to measure the latent variables: 
attitude, perceived behavioral control, subjective norm, personal norms, awareness of consequences, and ascription of 
responsibility. Past behavior was measured using an eight-point Likert scale. 
The items measuring past behavior were designed to reflect specific, relatable actions, as more concrete behavioral 
references tend to yield more accurate data than broad explanations (Oskamp & Schultz, 2005). The environmentally 
friendly behaviors for the questionnaire were chosen by considering which actual or desired behavioral changes were 
mentioned in the literature review (McIlvennie et al., 2020). Socio-demographic data was collected at the end of the 
survey. 
All participants who either do not have a Smart Home system or could not specify one are excluded from the analysis. 
Furthermore, only responses with all answers were considered for the analysis. We also examined whether participants 
showed straight-lining behavior across items within the latent variable scales to identify potential careless responses. 
However, no notable patterns of such behavior were found. For questions offering a free text field, responses that did not 
fit any of the provided response options were merged with the most appropriate existing category. For example, one of 
the entries stated “disabled” as their current occupation status, which was not covered by the response options. Hence, 
this entry was grouped under “unemployed.” The same process was applied for the socio-economic questions regarding 
education and home ownership. 
Reverse scoring was applied for the fifth item of the latent variable perceived behavioral control due to the nature of the 
question. A high score on the Likert scale for this specific item would indicate lower perceived behavioral control, 
whereas a high score for the other items of this construct indicates higher perceived behavioral control, hence the reverse 
scoring. Finally, the data for the latent variables show a multivariate non-normal distribution. 
3.2 Hybrid approach of structural equation modeling and random forest analysis 
Structural equation modeling (SEM) is a common technique used in behavioral research to identify causal relationships 
between latent or measured variables (Hair et al., 2010). It has been applied in various contexts, including psychology, 
environment, and information systems (Ramlall, 2017; Ji & Chan, 2019; Pal et al., 2018; Park et al., 2017; Rastegari 
Kopaei et al., 2021). SEM is a framework that combines multiple statistical methods and can evaluate several dependence 
relationships simultaneously (Hair et al., 2010). It provides explanatory power by showing how well a theoretical model 
fits the underlying survey data and consists of a structural model and a measurement model. The former shows the causal 
relationships between endogenous and exogenous variables, while the latter reflects the relationships between latent factor 
variables and observed variables (Hair et al., 2021). 
Attitudes and perceptions are main drivers of user intention, but these are latent constructs that cannot be directly 
measured. Hence, they are inferred through specific questionnaire items. SEM is particularly suited for analyzing latent 
constructs and offers advantages in addressing measurement errors compared to methods such as regression or factor 
analysis (Ramlall, 2017). Moreover, SEM is a flexible and comprehensive approach for testing theoretical models. 
Among the two dominant SEM approaches - covariance-based SEM (CB-SEM) and partial least squares SEM (PLSSEM) - PLS-SEM is more suitable for smaller sample sizes, complex models, and non-normal data distributions (Hair et 
al., 2021). Additionally, PLS-SEM allows for the inclusion of advanced model components, which is beneficial for our 
research model. Therefore, we conduct the data analysis using PLS-SEM. 
To build an explanatory model that can uncover both linear and non-linear causal relationships between the constructs in 
our proposed research model, SEM is extended with a machine learning technique. This method has been applied in 
several domains (Hizam et al., 2021; Priyadarshinee et al., 2017; Scott & Walczak, 2009; Sternad Zabukovšek et al., 
2019). The combination of SEM and machine learning algorithms is often implemented as a two-step process during data 
analysis (Chong, 2013; Sternad Zabukovšek et al., 2019). SEM is used to test the hypothesized influence of independent 
variables on the dependent variable, while the machine learning part evaluates the relative strength of these effects 
(Leong, et al., 2020a). 
Standard machine learning algorithms are typically not suited for causal analysis due to their black-box nature (Chan & 
Chong, 2012; Chong, 2013). To support causal interpretation, models must be transparent (Li et al., 2021). However, 
machine learning methods are particularly effective in detecting non-linear relationships between variables (Joshi & 
Yadav, 2018; Leong, et al., 2020b), while SEM is limited to linear relationships, which can oversimplify the factors 
influencing behavioral intention (Sohaib et al., 2020). Thus, machine learning helps uncover non-linear patterns within 
the proposed research model. 
Several machine learning methods can be used in survey research (Buskirk et al., 2018; Kern et al., 2019)). Prior studies 
have integrated artificial neural networks with SEM (Priyadarshinee et al., 2017), as well as other techniques such as 

--- PAGE 7 ---

 
7 
 
 
 
logistic regression, Bayesian networks, random forests, decision trees, if-then-else statements, and association rule mining 
(Akour et al., 2021; Arpaci, 2019; Dishakjian et al., 2021; Wong et al., 2021). In this study, we use a random forest 
algorithm to extend the SEM analysis, as it provides better interpretability and transparency in identifying the key factors 
that influence behavioral intention (Li et al., 2021). The random forest algorithm builds an ensemble of decision trees to 
predict an outcome based on multiple input variables (Breiman, 2001). The combined approach of SEM and random 
forest has been successfully applied in previous research to explain relationships between independent and dependent 
variables (Dishakjian et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2018). 
3.2.1 Model specification 
Structural equation modeling We use the SEMinR package (Ray et al., 2022) to estimate the SEM using the PLS-SEM 
method. The analysis is conducted in two steps: evaluating the measurement model and the structural model. First, the 
measurement model is defined by specifying the latent variables as constructs and describing their indicators which are 
derived from the questionnaire items. The latent variables awareness of consequences, ascription of responsibility, and 
personal norms are each measured using three indicators. Attitude is measured by seven indicators, subjective norm by 
five, perceived behavioral control by six, behavioral intention by five, and past behavior by four. We assume a reflective 
measurement, meaning the indicators are effects of the underlying construct, as opposed to the construct being an outcome 
of the indicators. 
Second, the structural model is defined, which outlines the relationships and directional paths between constructs. The 
method computes partial regression models for each path based on the survey data, producing correlations between 
constructs and their indicators. Due to the nonparametric characteristic of the PLS-SEM method, we apply bootstrapping 
to estimate standard errors and compute confidence intervals. This is done by generating multiple subsamples from the 
original dataset to estimate the model parameters. 
Third, we evaluate the measurement model for reliability and validity. In particular, we assess the indicator reliability, 
which explains how well each survey item (indicator) reflects its underlying construct. This is measured using indicator 
loadings - the correlation between the indicator and the construct it is intended to measure. Indicator loadings above 
0.708 indicate good reliability, as they explain more than 50% of the indicator’s variance (Hair et al., 2021). Internal 
consistency reliability is then checked using composite reliability, Cronbach’s alpha, and the reliability coefficient rhoA, 
which measure whether indicators of the same construct are correlated. Convergent validity assesses whether a construct 
sufficiently explains the variance in its indicators and is evaluated using average variance extracted (AVE). Values above 
0.5 are considered acceptable (Hair et al., 2019). Discriminant validity, which examines how distinct constructs are from 
each other, is assessed using the heterotrait-monotrait ratio (HTMT) of correlations. The HTMT compares the average 
correlations across constructs with the average correlations within the same construct. Values should not exceed 0.9 for 
conceptually similar constructs (Henseler et al., 2015). 
Fourth, we assess the structural model quality by evaluating collinearity, path significance, explanatory power, and 
predictive accuracy. Collinearity examines whether constructs are highly correlated, which can distort interpretation. The 
variance inflation factor (VIF) identifies collinearity issues when values exceed 5 (Hair et al., 2021). The path coefficients 
are evaluated for statistical significance (t-value) and effect size (f2). Bootstrapping is used to calculate t-values and 
confidence intervals for each coefficient. Explanatory power is assessed using the coefficient of determination (R²), which 
indicates how much variance is explained in the endogenous constructs (Shmueli & Koppius, 2011). Higher R² values 
indicate better explanatory strength. Predictive power is assessed using k-fold cross-validation, where the data is 
randomly split into subsets and repeatedly tested. Common prediction error metrics include root mean square error 
(RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE). 
Lastly, since our model includes the moderator variable past behavior, we also conduct a moderation analysis. This 
requires introducing interaction terms, as a moderator not only affects the endogenous construct directly but also changes 
the relationship between an exogenous and endogenous variable (Hair et al., 2021). We include four interaction terms for 
the relationships between attitude, subjective norm, perceived behavioral control, and personal norms with behavioral 
intention. 
Random Forest analysis 
We use the significant variables from the SEM results to conduct a random forest analysis and explore non-linear 
relationships with behavioral intention. We conduct the analysis in R using the randomForest package (Liaw & Wiener, 
2002), which implements Breiman’s original algorithm. The caret package (Kuhn, 2024) is used to tune and optimize 
model parameters. 
The indicators from the SEM model are used as predictors. The average score of the four behavioral intention variables 
(BI1, B2, B3, and BI4) is used as the outcome variable, ranging from 1 (low intention) to 7 (high intention) to use Smart 
Home for energy efficiency, making the random forest a regression model. From the preprocessed dataset, 70% of the 
responses are used for training and 30% for validation, resulting in 254 training samples and 109 validation samples. A 
bagging approach is used, which builds multiple trees from bootstrap samples of the training data. This helps reduce 

--- PAGE 8 ---

 
8 
 
 
 
variance by averaging multiple noisy but unbiased models (Hastie et al., 2009). For each tree, a random subset of 
predictors is chosen at each split. To prevent overfitting, we apply ten-fold cross-validation. After the model is trained, 
variable importance is calculated by measuring the improvement in the splitting criterion at each node. The average 
importance across all trees provides a ranking of the predictors. 
To optimize model performance, we tune two main parameters: the number of predictors considered at each split (mtry) 
and the minimum number of samples required at a terminal node (nodesize). A grid search is used to test mtry values 
from 1 to 8 and nodesize values of 1, 3, 5, and 10. Another key parameter is the number of trees. Increasing the number 
of trees beyond 750 does not improve performance (for details see Figure D1 in Appendix). Thus, the number of trees is 
set to 750 to reduce training time. To assess model accuracy, we report RMSE, R², and MAE as performance metrics. 
The programming code used in this work (and beyond) is open-sourced [Link to GitHub will be added after the peerreview process]. 
4 
Results 
4.1 Key demographics and descriptive statistics of respondents 
Among 363 observations, most of the survey participants are male (94%). The age of the participants is approximately 
normally distributed with the biggest group within the middle-aged category of 35-44 years (30%), followed by the age 
groups 45-54 (26%), and 25-34 (20%). In terms of educational background, 37% have a high school diploma or less, 36% 
hold a bachelor’s degree, and 22% received a master’s degree. Regarding the occupation status, 84% of all survey 
participants are either employed full-time or self-employed, whereas the remaining participants are either retired (9%), 
or students, unemployed, or part-time employed (6%). The majority of survey participants are homeowners (82%). 
Geographically, the distribution reflects the language options that were provided in the survey. Around 53% of all 
participants are from Germany and 30% are people from English-speaking countries (USA, Canada, UK, Australia). 
Household sizes consist mainly between two people (40%) and 3-4 people (42%). Most of the households do not have 
any children (61%), followed by those with one or two children (35%). Regarding the monthly net income of the 
household, 26% fall in the range of 5K-8K USD, followed by 22% within 3K-5K USD. A substantial number of 
participants report higher monthly income of 8K USD and more (see Table C1 in Appendix for details). 
Since SH systems can vary greatly between households due to its modular nature, additional information about the 
participants’ SH systems have been gathered. Most of the participants have been using SH technology between one and 
three years (43%), followed by four to six years (21%) and seven to ten years (11%). Recent users who have been using 
their SH for less than a year make up around 17%, whereas 6% have only started less than six months ago. The SH 
systems Home Assistant, Homematic IP, OpenHAB, HomeKit, ioBroker, and KNX, as well as products from Amazon, 
Google, and Philips were most often mentioned. Many participants also mentioned that they are using a combination of 
several systems. Out of all participants, around 59% state that they are currently not using a SHEMS as part of their smart 
home, whereas 39% state that they do. The most popular sensors and IoT products installed in the participants’ homes 
include smart plugs, light sources, switches, motion sensors, and smart thermostats. We provide a complete list of the 
smart home products and their respective occurrences across the sample size in Table C2 in Appendix. 
Furthermore, participants were asked what motivates them to install a SH (Table C3 in Appendix). Participants had to 
rank ten different reasons by allocating a total of 100 points. The most important factor is the interest in SH technology, 
closely followed by the increase in comfort and convenience. The sustainability and energy saving, entertainment-related 
reasons, desire to have more control over the home and to increase safety and security are ranked in third to sixth place 
respectively. Monetary savings are only ranked in seventh place, whereas homecare (ambient-assisted living) plays only 
a minor role. The “other” option includes the desire to install and program the system by residents, recommendation by 
friends, or other convenience- and interest-related motivations. 
4.2 Structural model results: personal norms, responsibility, and awareness drive energy-saving intentions 
Assessment of Measurement Model First, the measurement model without the moderator Past Behavior is analyzed to 
focus on the main effects on Behavioral Intention. The initial measurement model included all items from the 
questionnaire. However, after assessing the different measures, some of them showed low indicator loadings. For social 
science studies, indicator loadings below the threshold are not uncommon and should only be excluded if this improves 
other assessment factors (Hair et al., 2021). As this is the case, the following indicators are removed: Attitude: AT1, AT2, 
AT3, AT6; Subjective Norm: SN4, SN5; Perceived Behavioral Control: PBC2, PBC3, PBC5, PBC6; Behavioral 
Intention: BI5. The results show that the exclusion of these indicators below the threshold of 0.708 yield better results 
for internal consistency reliability, convergent validity, and discriminant validity. Moreover, the remaining indicators 
offer sufficient content validity to represent the respective constructs. The exclusion of these indicators implies that the 
corresponding items in the questionnaire have not been able to properly capture the desired constructs and may have to 
be revised if used in future research. 

--- PAGE 9 ---

 
9 
 
 
 
The indicator loadings for all items are now above the recommended threshold of 0.708 which provides acceptable 
indicator reliability (Hair et al., 2021), see Table 1. Cronbach’s alpha and rhoA show overall good results for the internal 
consistency reliability with values between 0.7 and 0.9. Regarding the convergent validity, all variables display average 
variance extracted (AVE) values greater than 0.5 which is the minimum acceptable AVE. For discriminant validity, we 
analyze heterotrait-monotrait ratio (HTMT) of correlations values (Table 2). Conceptually similar constructs with values 
over 0.9 indicate problems in discriminant validity. This is the case for the HTMT value for Awareness of Consequences 
and Ascription of Responsibility (0.92), and Ascription of Responsibility and Personal Norms (1.02). These constructs all 
stem from the NAM and have substantial similarities. Especially due to the underlying research question, the 
differentiation of the questions that are supposed to capture each of these constructs are vague. However, these constructs 
and their corresponding items will stay in the measurement model since they are expected to be highly correlated, 
measuring theoretically similar concepts. 
Table 1. Reliability and convergent validity of measurement model. 
Latent Variable 
Measurement 
Indicator 
Loading 
(≥0.708) 
Cronbach's 
Alpha 
(0.7~0.9) 
Reliability 
Coefficient 
(rhoA) 
(0.7~0.9) 
AVE 
(≥0.5) 
Attitude 
AT4 
0.85 
0.84 
0.84 
0.76 
AT5 
0.89 
AT7 
0.87 
Subjective Norm 
SN1 
0.86 
0.79 
0.81 
0.70 
SN2 
0.81 
SN3 
0.84 
Perceived 
Behavioral Control 
PBC1 
0.92 
0.70 
0.75 
0.77 
PBC4 
0.83 
Awareness of 
Consequences 
AC1 
0.84 
0.83 
0.84 
0.75 
AC2 
0.91 
AC3 
0.85 
Ascription of 
Responsibility 
AR1 
0.85 
0.80 
0.81 
0.72 
AR2 
0.90 
AR3 
0.78 
Personal Norms 
PN1 
0.80 
0.77 
0.77 
0.69 
PN2 
0.81 
PN3 
0.87 
Behavioral 
Intention 
BI1 
0.82 
0.87 
0.88 
0.72 
BI2 
0.91 
BI3 
0.87 
BI4 
0.80 
 
Table 2. Discriminant validity of measurement model. 
 
Awareness of 
Consequences 
Ascription of 
Responsibility 
Subjective 
Norm 
Attitude 
Perceived 
Behavioral 
Control 
Personal 
Norms 
Ascription of Responsibility 
0.92 
 
 
 
 
 
Subjective Norm 
0.78 
0.78 
 
 
 
 
Attitude 
0.45 
0.59 
0.47 
 
 
 
Perceived Behavioral Control 
0.19 
0.23 
0.20 
0.48 
 
 
Personal Norms 
0.83 
1.02 
0.80 
0.62 
0.27 
 
Behavioral Intention 
0.75 
0.86 
0.73 
0.73 
0.38 
0.89 

--- PAGE 10 ---

 
10 
 
 
 
 
Assessment of Structural Model After confirming the reliability and validity of the measurement model, we inspect 
the collinearity of the structural model. All variance inflation factor (VIF) values are below the threshold of three. This 
suggests that there are no collinearity problems between the constructs that influence endogenous variables. For the 
relationships between the latent variables, the original path coefficient estimates indicate the strongest positive influence 
from Awareness of Consequences to Ascription of Responsibility (0.76) and the lowest positive influence from Perceived 
Behavioral Control to Behavioral Intention (0.07), see Table 3. Bootstrapping the structural paths and assuming a 
significance level of five percent, the t-values reveal statistical significance for all variable relationships. However, the 
relationship between Perceived Behavioral Control and Behavioral Intention presents a very low path coefficient with a 
t-value and p-value barely above the threshold for statistical significance. This is emphasized by the low effect size 
(f2=0.01) for Perceived Behavioral Control on Behavioral Intention. Thus, Perceived Behavioral Control is assumed to 
only have a minimal effect on Behavioral Intention. The values for the coefficient of determination (R2) of the endogenous 
latent variables, which assess the model’s explanatory power, present moderate effects for Ascription of Responsibility 
(0.58), Personal Norms (0.67), and Behavioral Intention (0.65), whereas a weak effect is implied for Attitude (0.15). 
Comparing RMSE values to analyze the predictive power of the model, only one of the indicators displayed a lower 
RMSE compared to the naïve linear regression model benchmark. Therefore, the model has low predictive power. 
Additionally, the mediation effect from Subjective Norm on Personal Norms and Behavioral Intention is analyzed by 
testing the significance of indirect effects in the model. The results show that each path of the mediation effect is 
statistically significant, and the product of all paths is positive. This suggests a complementary mediation effect which 
means that the indirect and direct effect point in the same direction. 
Table 3. Assessment of structural model. 
Hypothesis 
Relationship 
Path 
coefficient 
Bootstrap 
SD 
t-value 
(>|1.96|) 
p-value 
Supported 
R2 
H1 
AT → BI 
0.31 
0.05 
6.55 
< .001 
Yes 
0.65 
H2 
PBC → BI 
0.07 
0.03 
2.00 
0.02 
Yes 
H3 
SN → BI 
0.21 
0.04 
5.00 
< .001 
Yes 
H6 
PN → BI 
0.42 
0.05 
9.17 
< .001 
Yes 
H4 
AC → AR 
0.76 
0.03 
27.48 
< .001 
Yes 
0.58 
H5 
AR → PN 
0.66 
0.03 
18.59 
< .001 
Yes 
0.67 
H8 
SN → PN 
0.22 
0.04 
5.40 
< .001 
Yes 
H7 
AC → AT 
0.38 
0.06 
6.16 
< .001 
Yes 
0.15 
Note: Bootstrap sample=10000. Significance level α=5%. Abbreviations: BI - Behavioral Intention, AT 
- Attitude, PBC - Perceived Behavioral Control, SN - Subjective Norm, AC - Awareness of 
Consequences, AR - Ascription of Responsibility, PN - Personal Norms, PB - Past Behavior. 
 
Moderation analysis The moderating effect of Past Behavior on the constructs Attitude, Subjective Norm, Perceived 
Behavioral Control, and Personal Norms is investigated by first introducing interaction terms for each combination. 
Subsequently, the measurement and structural model are evaluated based on the common assessment criteria. For the 
measurement model, the exclusion of the aforementioned indicators, as well as PB2 and PB4 (Past Behavior) yield the 
best results in terms of reliability and validity. Apart from that, the measurement model shows no big differences 
compared to the measurement model without the moderator. Similar to the structural model without moderation, the 
moderated structural model shows no collinearity problems and moderate explanatory power for the endogenous variables 
Ascription of Responsibility, Personal Norms, and Behavioral Intention, and weak explanatory power for Attitude. The 
predictive power of the model is low, as only two of the indicators for Behavioral Intention (BI1 & BI3) have lower 
RMSE values than the benchmark of the linear model. The interaction term Personal Norms * Past Behavior indicates a 
large effect size with a value of 0.025 which explains how much the moderator adds to the effect of the endogenous 
construct. The other interaction terms do not show any meaningful effect sizes. Bootstrapping the model shows that the 
interaction term Personal Norms * Past Behavior has a small negative effect on Behavioral Intention (-0.13), whereas 
the interaction terms Attitude * Past Behavior (0.02), Subjective Norm * Past Behavior (0.03), and Perceived Behavioral 
Control * Past Behavior (0.02), as well as the construct Past Behavior (0.13), have positive effects on Behavioral 
Intention, albeit mainly minor (see Table 4). However, the t-values of the interaction terms show that only Personal 
Norms * Past Behavior is statistically significant, leading to the rejection of the other three hypotheses. Furthermore, this 
model also rejects the effect from Perceived Behavioral Control to Behavioral Intention which emphasizes the result of 

--- PAGE 11 ---

 
11 
 
 
 
the minimal effect in the assessment of the previous structural model. Hence, Past Behavior moderates solely the 
relationship between Personal Norms and Behavioral Intention. 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. Assessment of moderation effect. 
Hypothesis 
Relationship 
Path 
Coefficient 
Bootstrap 
SD 
T-Value 
(>|1.96|) 
p-Value 
Supporte
d 
R2 
H4 
AC → AR 
0.76 
0.03 
27.62 
< .001 
Yes 
0.58 
H5 
AR → PN 
0.66 
0.03 
18.58 
< .001 
Yes 
0.67 
H8 
SN → PN 
0.22 
0.04 
5.40 
< .001 
Yes 
H7 
AC → AT 
0.38 
0.06 
6.22 
< .001 
Yes 
0.15 
H1 
AT → BI 
0.26 
0.05 
5.54 
< .001 
Yes 
0.68 
H2 
PBC → BI 
0.06 
0.04 
1.41 
0.08 
No 
H3 
SN → BI 
0.21 
0.04 
5.00 
< .001 
Yes 
H6 
PN → BI 
0.38 
0.04 
9.24 
< .001 
Yes 
H9a 
AT*PB → BI 
0.02 
0.05 
0.38 
0.35 
No 
H9c 
SN*PB → BI 
0.03 
0.04 
0.70 
0.24 
No 
H9d 
PN*PB → BI 
-0.13 
0.05 
-2.53 
0.01 
Yes 
H9b 
PBC*PB → BI 
0.02 
0.03 
0.67 
0.25 
No 
 
PB → BI 
0.13 
0.04 
3.24 
0.001 
 
Note: Bootstrap sample=10000. Significance level α=5%. BI - Behavioral Intention, AT - Attitude, PBC - Perceived 
Behavioral Control, SN - Subjective Norm, AC - Awareness of Consequences, AR - Ascription of Responsibility, 
PN - Personal Norms, PB - Past Behavior. 
 
We show the final path model in Figure 2 with the green paths representing positive relationships between the constructs, 
whereas the red path represents a negative relationship. Constructs whose statistical significance could not be proven are 
grayed out. The results of the SEM analysis show that Personal Norms have the strongest effect on users’ Behavioral 
Intention. Personal Norms are positively influenced by Ascription of Responsibility and, to a lesser extent, by Subjective 
Norm. Awareness of Consequences also shows a high impact on Ascription of Responsibility. However, since the 
measurement model initially showed a lack of discriminant validity for these relationships, the effects might be slightly 
overestimated. Awareness of Consequences also positively influences Attitude. People who have a positive perception 
about using their SH for energy efficiency show higher intentions to engage in this behavior. Having close friends and 
family that are supporting these behaviors has a positive effect on users’ Behavioral Intention as well. The effect of 
Perceived Behavioral Control is not supported by the SEM. The moderating effect of Past Behavior could only be 
supported in the context of Personal Norms. The direct effect of Past Behavior on Behavioral Intention indicates a low 
positive influence. The interaction effect of Past Behavior and Personal Norms, however, shows a small negative 
influence on the relationship between Personal Norms and Behavioral Intention. These results suggest that the 
relationship between Personal Norms and Behavioral Intention is 0.38 if Past Behavior is moderate. For higher values 
of Past Behavior, the relationship between Personal Norms and Behavioral Intention decreases by the size of the 
interaction term (i.e., 0.38 - 0.13 = 0.25). Vice versa, lower values of Past Behavior result in an increase of the relationship 
between Personal Norms and Behavioral Intention by the size of the interaction term (i.e., 0.38 - (-0.13) = 0.51). Overall, 
the SEM analysis reveals moderate explanatory power for Behavioral Intention. Eight out of twelve hypotheses were 
shown to be statistically significant. 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---

 
12 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Path model with path coefficients and indicator loadings. BI - Behavioral Intention, AT - Attitude, PBC - 
Perceived Behavioral Control, SN - Subjective Norm, AC - Awareness of Consequences, AR - Ascription of 
Responsibility, PN - Personal Norms, PB - Past Behavior. 
4.3 Random forest results confirm responsibility and personal norms as key predictors for smart home energy 
use intentions 
As a second step, the SEM analysis is extended by applying a random forest algorithm to examine the importance of 
influential factors on Behavioral Intention to use SH for energy efficiency. A node size of three and an mtry of one yield 
the lowest RMSE value and are therefore selected as optimal parameters for the final model (Figure D2 in Appendix). 
The results of the final model show an RMSE of 0.5 and an R² value of 0.68 on the training data. For the validation set, 
the RMSE increases to 0.85, R² is 0.61, and the MAE is 0.65. As with the dependent variable Behavioral Intention, these 
error values are based on a seven-point Likert scale. This indicates that the model explains approximately 61% of the 
variance in the validation data, with an average prediction error (MAE) of 0.65. While the RMSE of around 0.8 suggests 
some prediction uncertainty - likely due to noise in the survey data - the model still demonstrates moderate predictive 
power in the context of human behavior and intention modeling. 
Moreover, the model results help to understand the importance of the variables that affect user’s intention to use their 
smart homes for energy efficiency. To assess this, we examine the variable importance from the trained model. The node 
purity values of the ten most important indicators are shown in Figure 3. Among them, AR2 (Ascription of Responsibility) 
has the highest importance, followed by PN3 and PN1 (Personal Norms). PN2 (Personal Norms), AT4 (Attitude), AC2 

--- PAGE 13 ---

 
13 
 
 
 
(Awareness of Consequences), and PB3 (Past Behavior) show similar levels of importance. The remaining top indicators 
include AR3 (Ascription of Responsibility), AT7 (Attitude), and SN1 (Subjective Norm). 
Afterward, the indicators for each construct were aggregated and averaged to evaluate the overall importance of each 
construct (Figure 4, left). In addition, a second random forest model was trained using only the aggregated construct 
scores. In this case, the construct values were summed and averaged before model training. The results show a nearly 
identical ranking, except for Subjective Norm and Past Behavior, which switched places (Figure 4, right). Furthermore, 
the differences between the constructs are greater in this second model. Overall, Ascription of Responsibility ranks 
highest, followed by Personal Norms, Attitude, and Awareness of Consequences, reflecting similar patterns as observed 
in the SEM. 
 
 
Figure 3. Indicator importance based on random forest results. 
 
Figure 4. Left - Average variable importance based on individual indicators. Right - Variable importance based on newly 
trained random forest using aggregated construct scores. Abbreviations: BI - Behavioral Intention, AT - Attitude, PBC - 
Perceived Behavioral Control, SN - Subjective Norm, AC - Awareness of Consequences, AR - Ascription of 
Responsibility, PN - Personal Norms, PB - Past Behavior. 
4.4 Survey insights: half report energy savings with smart home, many seek financial incentives 
Survey participants were asked about their energy bills, energy consumption, and which smart home features they believe 
could encourage more energy-efficient behavior at home. About half (50.1%) of respondents reported noticing cost 
savings on their energy bills since installing smart home technology. By contrast, 26% said they had not noticed any 
savings, while the remaining 24% either did not observe savings or were not using smart home products likely to generate 
them. Around 49% of participants stated that their energy consumption had decreased since using a smart home. 
Approximately 7% reported an increase in consumption, and 27% observed no change. The remaining 18% said they did 
not know whether their energy use had changed. 
Regarding incentives, participants indicated that the most motivating factors for reducing energy consumption would be 
receiving rewards (e.g., tax deductions) based on energy savings and getting information from their smart home about 
potential financial savings (Table C4 in Appendix). These were followed by clearer and more personalized guidance on 
how to save energy, comparisons with neighborhood energy consumption, and information about the environmental 
impact of reducing personal energy use. In contrast, a more gamified user interface and the ability to set personal energy 
goals were seen as the least motivating factors. As for the perceived usability of their smart home system (Table C5 in 
Appendix), the majority of participants rated it as “good” (42%), followed by “okay” (32%), and “very good” (20%). 
Only 6% rated the usability as “poor” or “very poor.” 

--- PAGE 14 ---

 
14 
 
 
 
5 
Discussion 
5.1 Interpretation of results 
The results of the SEM indicate that Personal Norms have the strongest influence on the intention to use smart homes for 
energy efficiency. Moreover, the positive effect of Awareness of Consequences on Ascription of Responsibility, followed 
by the effect of Ascription of Responsibility on Personal Norms, is statistically significant. This suggests that individuals 
who are more aware of the consequences of their energy consumption feel a stronger sense of responsibility, which in 
turn activates their Personal Norms and is reflected in their Behavioral Intention to use smart homes for energy efficiency. 
These findings align with previous research (Nilsson et al., 2018; Schwartz et al., 2015) highlight how energy feedback 
systems can increase awareness of energy consumption, thereby influencing users’ potential to save energy. 
The effects of Subjective Norm on Behavioral Intention, as well as on Personal Norms, were found to be statistically 
significant. This indicates that social pressure from close friends and family not only influences users’ intention to use 
smart homes for energy efficiency but also shapes their moral obligation to behave more sustainably. These findings are 
consistent with Dominicis et al. (2019), who show that providing normative feedback (i.e., feedback framed as a social 
comparison) leads to long-term reductions in household electricity consumption. Similarly, Shevchuk et al. (2020) find 
that social support, when combined with perceived persuasiveness, positively influences the continued intention to use 
smart metering devices. In their study, perceived persuasiveness - defined as users' favorable impressions of smart the 
metering system - closely aligns with the construct of Attitude in this research, thereby supporting the observed positive 
effect of Attitude on Behavioral Intention. 
These findings are further supported by the results of the random forest analysis. The variable importance ranking shows 
that Ascription of Responsibility scores highest, followed by Personal Norms, Attitude, and Awareness of Consequences. 
Since Awareness of Consequences, Ascription of Responsibility, and Personal Norms originate from the Norm Activation 
Model (NAM), the results suggest that pro-environmental sentiments are strong predictors of the intention to use smart 
homes for energy efficiency. This is reinforced by the item-level random forest results, which identify AR2 (Ascription 
of Responsibility) as the most important indicator, followed by PN3, PN1, and PN2 (Personal Norms). Each of these 
items emphasizes an individual’s moral obligation to act sustainably. Thus, personal values appear to play the most crucial 
role in shaping the desire to adopt smart home technologies for environmental reasons. 
The moderating effect of Past Behavior is only supported in the relationship between Personal Norms and Behavioral 
Intention, and it shows a negative influence. This suggests that when users have already established routines in their 
homes, Personal Norms have less impact on their intention to use smart homes for energy efficiency. In contrast, if users 
have not yet formed strong routines, the impact of their Personal Norms on Behavioral Intention increases. Similar 
findings are reported by Wang et al. (2014), who shows that residential habits are negatively correlated with the intention 
to engage in energy-saving behavior. 
The lack of evidence for a relationship between Perceived Behavioral Control and Behavioral Intention may be explained 
by the relatively homogeneous sample of participants, who are likely early adopters of smart home technology and 
therefore tend to be more tech-savvy. As a result, participants may generally perceive a high level of control due to their 
technical skills. Early adopters are typically characterized by greater prior awareness of smart home technology, higher 
incomes, and active information-seeking behavior (Hargreaves & Wilson, 2017; Rogers, 2010). These characteristics 
align with the demographics of this study, which include a high proportion of homeowners and individuals with aboveaverage incomes. Furthermore, interest in SHT was ranked as the most important reason for adoption. Schwartz et al. 
(2015) and Hargreaves et al. (2010) also highlight the predominance of male users in energy-related technology use, 
which is also the case for this study. Additionally, individuals with higher incomes who own their homes and are more 
aware of their energy costs may be more inclined to adopt energy-efficient behaviors (Karlin et al., 2014). Therefore, the 
observed effects in this study may not generalize to populations with different characteristics. It should also be noted that 
the reported household income data may be skewed due to inaccurate responses, as the values appear relatively high. 
5.2 Implications 
Based on the results, we draw three implications. 
(i) Pro-environmental intentions and behavior 
Strengthening public awareness of climate change and the role of household energy consumption can enhance proenvironmental intentions and behaviours. Framing smart home technologies as tools for energy efficiency - rather than 
mere convenience - can positively shape user motivation and behavioural intention. Informational strategies that highlight 
environmental impacts, combined with personalised energy feedback, may increase individuals’ sense of responsibility 
and activate personal norms leading to energy-saving behaviors. Policy mechanisms such as financial incentives (e.g. tax 
credits or rebates tied to energy savings), along with targeted communication campaigns, could further support the 

--- PAGE 15 ---

 
15 
 
 
 
adoption and effective use of smart homes for energy efficiency. Survey responses reinforce this potential, with a majority 
of participants indicating that cost savings and reward schemes would be strong motivators for engaging in energyefficient behaviour via smart home systems. 
(iii) User-centric smart home design 
As end-users are central to achieving household energy savings, the design of smart homes must prioritise usability and 
adaptability. Systems should deliver information that is both easy to interpret and contextually relevant, enabling users 
to understand and act upon their consumption data. Survey responses support this need, with many participants expressing 
a preference for more accessible and personalised energy feedback. To support sustained engagement, smart home 
systems should account for diverse levels of technical skill, familiarity, and motivation, while also adapting to changes 
in user behavior over time. Tailored onboarding and support services can reduce adoption barriers, especially for users 
less experienced with digital technologies. Importantly, challenges such as poor interoperability across devices must be 
addressed to streamline installation and everyday use. Product preference data from the survey further highlight that users 
tend to favour affordable and easy-to-install devices over complex, high-cost alternatives. Lowering cognitive and 
technical barriers to adoption may therefore play a key role in unlocking the energy-saving potential of smart homes at 
scale. 
(iii) Systems-level approach 
Maximising the energy efficiency potential of smart homes requires a more holistic systems perspective. Outcomes are 
shaped not only by user behaviour but also by a complex interplay of structural, environmental, and socio-technical 
factors. Building characteristics (e.g., type, age, thermal performance) interact with local climate conditions, utility 
infrastructure, and occupant needs. The effectiveness of smart home technologies further depends on their integration 
into broader systems, including smart grids, utility platforms, dynamic tariff schemes, and demand response programmes. 
Policy and regulatory frameworks are critical enablers, particularly in addressing disparities linked to geography, housing 
stock, and socio-economic status. Ensuring equitable access and interoperability across systems is essential. Future 
research should consider these interdependencies to design inclusive, adaptive, and resilient smart home solutions that 
contribute meaningfully to energy system decarbonisation. 
5.3 Recommendations 
Drawing on the findings of this study, we propose a set of recommendations aimed at increasing the effectiveness and 
adoption of smart home systems for energy efficiency. 
(1) Leveraging personal norms rather than control beliefs 
The results suggest that personal norms, such as a sense of responsibility for reducing environmental impact, are stronger 
predictors of behavioral intention than perceived control. While technical usability remains essential, its influence may 
be secondary to emotional and normative appeals. Engaging users' values through narratives, framing, or feedback 
mechanisms that reinforce personal and social responsibility may be more effective than focusing on functionality alone. 
Displaying smart home information that taps into user’s environmental values, social norms, or moral responsibility can 
play a key role in shaping sustained pro-environmental action. 
(2) Designing for continuity and habit formation 
Users who already engage in sustainable practices benefit less from one-time informational interventions and more from 
features that support ongoing behavior. Tools such as automations, personalized goal-setting, and longitudinal feedback 
can reinforce sustainable habits over time. Embedding nudges into routine interactions with smart home systems can help 
maintain engagement without requiring constant user attention. The goal is to normalize energy-efficient behavior as a 
stable, easy-to-follow part of daily life. 
(3) Providing personalized feedback on financial and environmental benefits 
Users in this study expressed strong interest in receiving tailored insights on how their behaviors translate into monetary 
savings and environmental impact. Smart home systems should incorporate personalized feedback on energy 
consumption and actionable recommendations that reflect real-time and historical usage patterns. This feedback should 
be easy to interpret and embedded within the interface, helping users connect everyday decisions with long-term 
outcomes. 
(4) Providing information support for “green automation defaults” 
We define “green automation defaults” as pre-configured smart home automations that initiate energy-efficient actions 
based on specific signals (e.g., grid carbon intensity, electricity price, occupancy). Similar to “green defaults” (Sunstein, 
2021; Neumann and Mehlkop, 2020), green automation defaults aim to promote sustainable choices with minimal user 
effort. Examples include a dishwasher starting when renewable energy availability on the grid is highest, or an electric 

--- PAGE 16 ---

 
16 
 
 
 
vehicle beginning to charge when dynamic tariffs enter a low-price period. Given the strong correlation between 
electricity price and carbon intensity, shifting consumption to low-price periods can also reduce emissions by aligning 
usage with off-peak, low-carbon hours. Smart home systems are increasingly capable of supporting these automations by 
using real-time external signals as triggers (Zharova et al., 2024a). Future research should focus on providing 
informational support for green automation defaults to facilitate sustainable behavior by embedding low-carbon choices 
into automated household routines. 
(5) Implementing policy mechanisms to financially reward household energy savings 
Survey participants consistently ranked financial incentives, such as tax credits or rebates, as key motivators for engaging 
in energy-efficient behavior. Policymakers can harness this by developing programs that reward measurable reductions 
in household electricity consumption (e.g. verified through smart meter or smart home data). These incentives not only 
reduce the upfront barrier to adoption but also reinforce sustained engagement with smart home technologies for energy 
efficiency. Aligning behavioral incentives with environmental policy goals presents a powerful pathway for accelerating 
the energy transition at the household level. 
5.3 Limitations and future research 
This study has several limitations. First, survey participants provided only self-reported behavior. Although quality 
checks were implemented, it cannot be guaranteed that all respondents were actual smart home users or that all responses 
were fully truthful. Second, the survey was only available in German and English, which excluded individuals who speak 
other languages. Additionally, geographical differences were not examined in this study in order to maintain the minimum 
required sample size for data analysis. Lastly, structural equation modeling can only test relationships that are explicitly 
specified, meaning that other variables not included in the model may better predict behavioral intention. 
Future research should include long-term field studies to examine how smart home user perceptions influence both 
intentions and actual energy-related behaviors over time, thereby validating the present findings in real-world settings. 
While behavioral intention is considered a strong predictor of actual behavior, this relationship should be further explored. 
Research should also investigate the perceptions of user groups beyond early adopters to identify differences that could 
inform more inclusive smart home designs. Segmentation of user groups may help tailor systems to diverse needs and 
accommodate changing dynamics within households. Finally, future studies should also assess whether these findings 
hold across different regions. 
6 
Conclusions 
This study provides empirical evidence that personal norms, shaped by environmental awareness and a sense of 
responsibility, are the strongest predictors of users' behavioral intention to use smart homes for energy efficiency. 
Subjective norms and attitudes also show statistically significant effects, indicating the importance of social influence 
and positive perceptions. In contrast, perceived behavioral control has only a minimal effect. These findings suggest that 
energy-saving behavior in the context of smart homes is driven less by users’ technical abilities and more by their values, 
motivations, and social environment. To unlock the full potential of smart homes for energy efficiency, system design 
must go beyond technical functionality. Aligning system features with users’ values, such as providing personalized 
feedback, supporting automation, and offering targeted incentives, can help close the gap between intention and action. 
Acknowledgements 
Alona Zharova greatly appreciates the support of the Joachim Herz Stiftung. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---

 
17 
 
 
 
References 
Abrahamse, W., & Schuitema, G. (2020). Psychology and energy conservation: Contributions from theory and practice. 
In Energy and Behaviour (pp. 19–44). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818567-4.00001-6 
Ajzen, I. (1985). From Intentions to Actions: A Theory of Planned Behavior. In Action Control (pp. 11–39). Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-69746-3_2 
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179–
211. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T 
Ajzen, I. (2020). The theory of planned behavior: Frequently asked questions. Human Behavior and Emerging 
Technologies, 2(4), 314–324. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.195 
Akour, I., Alshurideh, M., Al Kurdi, B., Al Ali, A., & Salloum, S. (2021). Using Machine Learning Algorithms to Predict 
People's Intention to Use Mobile Learning Platforms During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Ma-chine Learning Approach. 
JMIR Medical Education, 7(1), e24032. https://doi.org/10.2196/24032 
Alaa, M., Zaidan, A. A., Zaidan, B. B., Talal, M., & Kiah, M. (2017). A review of smart home applications based on 
Internet of Things. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 97, 48–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2017.08.017 
Anker-Nilssen, P. (2003). Household energy use and the environment—a conflicting issue. Applied Energy, 76(1-3), 
189-196. 
Anser, M. K., Zaigham, G. H. K., Imran Rasheed, M., Pitafi, A. H., Iqbal, J., & Luqman, A. (2020). Social me-dia usage 
and individuals’ intentions toward adopting Bitcoin: The role of the theory of planned behavior and perceived risk. 
International Journal of Communication Systems, 33(17), e4590. https://doi.org/10.1002/dac.4590 
Arkorful, V. E., Hammond, A., Lugu, B. K., Basiru, I., Sunguh, K. K., & Charmaine-Kwade, P. (2020) Investigating the 
intention to use technology among medical students: An application of an extended model of the theory of planned 
behavior. Journal of Public Affairs, n/a(n/a), e2460. https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2460 
Arpaci, I. (2019). A hybrid modeling approach for predicting the educational use of mobile cloud computing services in 
higher education. Computers in Human Behavior, 90, 181–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.09.005 
Breiman, L. (2001). Random Forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324 
Buskirk, T. D., Kirchner, A., Eck, A., & Signorino, C. S. (2018). An Introduction to Machine Learning Methods for 
Survey Researchers. Survey Practice, 11(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.29115/SP-2018-0004 
Casquero-Modrego, N., Antonopoulos, C., Fuentes, T. L., McCord, K. H., & Walker, I. S. (2025). Decarbonizing 
residential buildings in the United States: A comparative analysis of households and construction professionals. Energy 
Research & Social Science, 120, 103908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2024.103908 
Chan, F. T., & Chong, A. Y. (2012). A SEM–neural network approach for understanding determinants of 
interorganizational system standard adoption and performances. Decision Support Systems, 54(1), 621–630. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2012.08.009 
Chen, M.‑F. (2016). Extending the theory of planned behavior model to explain people's energy savings and carbon 
reduction behavioral intentions to mitigate climate change in Taiwan–moral obligation matters. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 112, 1746–1753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.07.043 
Chen, Y. (2020). An investigation of the influencing factors of chinese wechat users’ environmental information-sharing 
behavior based on an integrated model of UGT, NAM, and TPB. Sustainability (Switzerland), 12(7). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12072710 
Chong, A. Y.‑L. (2013). A two-staged SEM-neural network approach for understanding and predicting the determinants 
of 
m-commerce 
adoption. 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, 
40(4), 
1240–1247. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2012.08.067 
Conner M, Smith N, McMillan B. (2003). Examining normative pressure in the theory of planned behaviour: Impact of 
gender and passengers on intentions to break the speed limit. Curr Psychol. ;22(3):252–263. 
Creutzig, F., Roy, J., Lamb, W. F., Azevedo, I. M. L., de Bruin, W. B., Dreo, J., ... & Weber, E. U. (2022). Chapter 5: 
Demand, services and social aspects of mitigation. In P. R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, 
D. McCollum, & M. Pathak (Eds.), Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group 
III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 445–551). Cambridge 
University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/ 

--- PAGE 18 ---

 
18 
 
 
 
Dishakjian, V., Fessler, D. M. T., & Sparks, A. M. (2021). Live fast, die young and sleep later: Life history strategy and 
human sleep behavior. Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health, 9(1), 36–52. https://doi.org/10.1093/emph/eoaa048 
Dominicis, S. de, Sokoloski, R., Jaeger, C. M., & Schultz, P. W. (2019). Making the smart meter social promotes longterm energy conservation. Palgrave Communications, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0254-5 
Earle, A. M., Napper, L. E., LaBrie, J. W., Brooks-Russell, A., Smith, D. J., & Rutte, J. de (2020). Examining interactions 
within the theory of planned behavior in the prediction of intentions to engage in cannabis-related driving behaviors. 
Journal of American College Health: J of ACH, 68(4), 374–380. https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.2018.1557197 
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Ford, R., Pritoni, M., Sanguinetti, A., & Karlin, B. (2017). Categories and functionality of smart home technology for 
energy management. Building and Environment, 123, 543–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.07.020 
Fornara, F., Manca, S., Meleddu, D., & Strazzera, E. (2025). Exploring attitudes, beliefs, and motives related to energy 
efficiency 
for 
buildings 
in 
Ireland 
and 
Italy. 
Energy 
Research 
& 
Social 
Science, 
120, 
103913. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2024.103913 
Forward, S. E. (2009). The theory of planned behaviour: The role of descriptive norms and past behaviour in the 
prediction of drivers’ intentions to violate. Transportation Research Part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 12(3), 198207. 
Greaves, M., Zibarras, L. D., & Stride, C. (2013). Using the theory of planned behavior to explore environ-mental 
behavioral 
intentions 
in 
the 
workplace. 
Journal 
of 
Environmental 
Psychology, 
34, 
109–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.02.003 
Groot, J. I. M. de, & Steg, L. (2009). Morality and prosocial behavior: The role of awareness, responsibility, and norms 
in 
the 
norm 
activation 
model. 
The 
Journal 
of 
Social 
Psychology, 
149(4), 
425–449. 
https://doi.org/10.3200/SOCP.149.4.425-449 
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2010). Multivariate Data Analysis. ISBN: 978-1-292-02190-4 
Hair, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., Danks, N. P., & Ray, S. (2021). Partial Least Squares Structural 
Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) Using R. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80519-7 
Hair, J. F., Risher, J. J., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2019). When to use and how to report the results of PLS-SEM. 
European business review. 
Han, H. (2014). The norm activation model and theory-broadening: Individuals' decision-making on envi-ronmentallyresponsible 
convention 
attendance. 
Journal 
of 
Environmental 
Psychology, 
40, 
462–471. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.10.006 
Han, H., & Hyun, S. S. (2017). Drivers of customer decision to visit an environmentally responsible museum: merging 
the theory of planned behavior and norm activation theory. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 34(9), 1155–1168. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10548408.2017.1304317 
Hargreaves, T., & Wilson, C. (2017). Smart Homes and Their Users. Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68018-7 
Hargreaves, T., Nye, M., & Burgess, J. (2010). Making energy visible: A qualitative field study of how householders 
interact with feedback from smart energy monitors. Energy policy, 38(10), 6111-6119. 
Hargreaves, T., Wilson, C., & Hauxwell-Baldwin, R. (2018). Learning to live in a smart home. Building Research & 
Information, 46(1), 127-139. 
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2009). The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, inference, and 
prediction (2nd ed.). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7 
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2015). A new criterion for assessing discriminant validity in variance-based 
structural equation modeling. Journal of the academy of marketing science, 43(1), 115-135. 
Hizam, S. M., Ahmed, W., Fahad, M., Akter, H., Sentosa, I., & Ali, J. (2021). User Behavior Assessment Towards 
Biometric Facial Recognition System: A SEM-Neural Network Approach. In K. Arai (Ed.), Ad-vances in Intelligent 
Systems and Computing. Advances in Information and Communication (Vol. 1364, pp. 1037–1050). Springer 
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-73103-8_75 
IPCC. (2022). Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (P. R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, 
R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M. Pathak, et al., Eds.). Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/ 

--- PAGE 19 ---

 
19 
 
 
 
Irwin, G. (2017b). Hot under the collar? Building a perceptive home energy interface for chemotherapy recipients. 
SmartObject 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Workshop on Interacting with Smart Objects, Co-Located with IUI 
2017. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1145/3038450.3038454 
Ji, W., & Chan, E. H. W. (2019). Critical Factors Influencing the Adoption of Smart Home Energy Technology in China: 
A Guangdong Province Case Study. Energies, 12(21), 4180. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12214180 
Joshi, R., & Yadav, R. (2018). An Integrated SEM Neural Network Approach to Study Effectiveness of Brand Extension 
in 
Indian 
FMCG 
Industry. 
Business 
Perspectives 
and 
Research, 
6(2), 
113–128. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2278533718764502 
Karlin, B., Davis, N., Sanguinetti, A., Gamble, K., Kirkby, D., & Stokols, D. (2014). Dimensions of conservation: 
Exploring differences among energy behaviors. Environment and Behavior, 46(4), 423-452. 
Kern, C., Klausch, T., & Kreuter, F. (2019). Tree-based Machine Learning Methods for Survey Research. Survey 
Research Methods, Vol 13, No 1, 73-93. 
Kidwell, B., & Jewell, R. D. (2008). The influence of past behavior on behavioral intent: An information-processing 
explanation. Psychology and Marketing, 25(12), 1151–1166. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20258 
Kim, J. J., & Hwang, J. (2020). Merging the norm activation model and the theory of planned behavior in the context of 
drone food delivery services: Does the level of product knowledge really matter? Journal of Hospitality and Tourism 
Management, 42, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhtm.2019.11.002 
Kuhn, M. (2024). caret: Classification and regression training (R package version 6.0-94) [Computer software]. 
Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN). https://cran.r-project.org/package=caret 
Lashkari, Chen, & Musilek (2019). Energy Management for Smart Homes—State of the Art. Applied Scienc-es, 9(17), 
3459. https://doi.org/10.3390/app9173459 
Leong, L.‑Y., Hew, T.‑S., Ooi, K.‑B., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2020a). Predicting trust in online advertising with an SEMartificial 
neural 
network 
approach. 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, 
162, 
113849. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113849 
Leong, L.‑Y., Hew, T.‑S., Ooi, K.‑B., & Wei, J. (2020b). Predicting mobile wallet resistance: A two-staged structural 
equation modeling-artificial neural network approach. International Journal of Infor-mation Management, 51, 102047. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.102047 
Li, J [Jiarui], Sawaragi, T., & Horiguchi, Y. (2021). Introduce structural equation modelling to machine learning problems 
for building an explainable and persuasive model. SICE Journal of Control, Measure-ment, and System Integration, 1–
13. https://doi.org/10.1080/18824889.2021.1894040 
Liaw, A., & Wiener, M. (2002). Classification and regression by randomForest. R News, 2(3), 18–22. 
https://cogns.northwestern.edu/cbmg/liawandwiener2002.pdf 
Liébana-Cabanillas, F., Marinković, V., & Kalinić, Z. (2017). A SEM-neural network approach for predicting antecedents 
of 
m-commerce 
acceptance. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Management, 
37(2), 
14–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.10.008 
Liébana-Cabanillas, F., Marinkovic, V., Ramos de Luna, I., & Kalinic, Z. (2018). Predicting the determinants of mobile 
payment acceptance: A hybrid SEM-neural network approach. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 129, 117–
130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.12.015 
Liu, Y., Sheng, H., Mundorf, N., Redding, C., & Ye, Y. (2017). Integrating Norm Activation Model and Theory of 
Planned Behavior to Understand Sustainable Transport Behavior: Evidence from China. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14121593 
Marikyan, D., Papagiannidis, S., & Alamanos, E. (2019). A systematic review of the smart home literature: A user 
perspective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 138, 139–154. 
Martin, R., & Larsen, S. P. A. K. (2024). “I never look at a temperature device, I just feel it”: Practical knowledge, smart 
technologies, and heating and cooling practices between Denmark and Australia. Energy Research & Social Science, 108, 
103389. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2023.103389 
Kuhn, M. (2021). caret: Classification and Regression Training. R package version 6.0-90. https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=caret 
McIlvennie, C., Sanguinetti, A., & Pritoni, M. (2020). Of impacts, agents, and functions: An interdisciplinary metareview of smart home energy management systems research. Energy Research & Social Sci-ence, 68, 101555. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101555 

--- PAGE 20 ---

 
20 
 
 
 
Meng, B., Chua, B.‑L., Ryu, H. B., & Han, H. (2020). Volunteer tourism (VT) traveler behavior: merging norm activation 
model 
and 
theory 
of 
planned 
behavior. 
Journal 
of 
Sustainable 
Tourism, 
28(12), 
1947–1969. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2020.1778010 
Neumann, R., & Mehlkop, G. (2020). Framing electricity plan choices to enhance green energy usage: A choice 
experiment 
with 
panel 
data 
from 
Germany. 
Energy 
Research 
& 
Social 
Science, 
70, 
101741. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101741 
Nilsson, A., Wester, M., Lazarevic, D., & Brandt, N. (2018). Smart homes, home energy management systems and realtime feedback: Lessons for influencing household energy consumption from a Swe-dish field study. Energy and 
Buildings, 179, 15–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.08.026 
Oikonomou, V., Becchis, F., Steg, L., & Russolillo, D. (2009). Energy saving and energy effi-ciency concepts for policy 
making. Energy policy, 37(11), 4787-4796. 
Onwezen, M. C., Antonides, G., & Bartels, J. (2013). The Norm Activation Model: An exploration of the functions of 
anticipated pride and guilt in pro-environmental behaviour. Journal of Economic Psychology, 39, 141–153. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2013.07.005 
Oskamp, S., & Schultz, P. W. (2005). Environmental attitudes. In S. Oskamp, & P. W. Schultz (Eds.), Attitudes and 
opinions (pp. 440e462). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Ouellette, J. A., & Wood, W. (1998). Habit and intention in everyday life: The multiple processes by which past behavior 
predicts future behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 124(1), 54–74. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.124.1.54 
Pakravan, M. H., & MacCarty, N. A. (2020). Design for clean technology adoption: Integration of usage context, user 
behavior, and technology performance in design. Journal of Mechanical Design, Transactions of the ASME, 142(9). 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4046236 
Pal, D., Funilkul, S., Charoenkitkarn, N., & Kanthamanon, P. (2018). Internet-of-Things and Smart Homes for Elderly 
Healthcare: An End User Perspective. IEEE Access, 6, 10483–10496. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2808472 
Park, E.‑S., Hwang, B., Ko, K., & Kim, D. (2017). Consumer Acceptance Analysis of the Home Energy Management 
System. Sustainability, 9(12), 2351. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9122351 
Park, J., & Ha, S. (2014). Understanding Consumer Recycling Behavior: Combining the Theory of Planned Behavior and 
the 
Norm 
Activation 
Model. 
Family 
and 
Consumer 
Sciences 
Research 
Journal, 
42(3), 
278–291. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/fcsr.12061 
Peacock, A. D., Chaney, J., Goldbach, K., Walker, G., Tuohy, P., Santonja, S., Todoli, D., & Owens, E. H. (2017). Codesigning the next generation of home energy management systems with lead-users. Applied Ergonomics, 60, 194–206. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.11.016 
Priyadarshinee, P., Raut, R. D., Jha, M. K., & Gardas, B. B. (2017). Understanding and predicting the determinants of 
cloud computing adoption: A two staged hybrid SEM - Neural networks approach. Computers in Human Behavior, 76, 
341–362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.07.027 
Ramlall, I. (2017). Applied structural equation modelling for researchers and practitioners: Using R and Stata for 
behavioural research (First edition). Emerald. 
Rastegari Kopaei, H., Nooripoor, M., Karami, A., Petrescu-Mag, R. M., & Petrescu, D. C. (2021). Drivers of Residents’ 
Home Composting Intention: Integrating the Theory of Planned Behavior, the Norm Ac-tivation Model, and the 
Moderating Role of Composting Knowledge. Sustainability, 13(12), 6826. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13126826 
Rezaei, R., Safa, L., Damalas, C. A., & Ganjkhanloo, M. M. (2019). Drivers of farmers' intention to use inte-grated pest 
management: Integrating theory of planned behavior and norm activation model. Journal of Environmental Management, 
236, 328–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.01.097 
Riabchuk, V., Hagel, L., Germaine, F., & Zharova, A. (2024). Utility-based context-aware multi-agent recommendation 
system 
for 
energy 
efficiency 
in 
residential 
buildings. 
Information 
Fusion, 
112, 
102559. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102559 
Risteska Stojkoska, B. L., & Trivodaliev, K. V. (2017). A review of Internet of Things for smart home: Chal-lenges and 
solutions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 140, 1454–1464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.006 
Rogers, E. M. (2010). Diffusion of innovations. Simon and Schuster. 
Saad-al-sumaiti, A., Ahmed, M. H., & Salama, M. M. A. (2014). Smart Home Activities: A Literature Review. Electric 
Power Components and Systems, 42(3-4), 294–305. 

--- PAGE 21 ---

 
21 
 
 
 
Sanguinetti, A., Karlin, B., Ford, R., Salmon, K., & Dombrovski, K. (2018). What’s energy management got to do with 
it? Exploring the role of energy management in the smart home adoption process. En-ergy Efficiency, 11(7), 1897–1911. 
Schwartz, S. H. (1977). Normative Influences on Altruism. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. Advances 
in Experimental Social Psychology Volume 10 (Vol. 10, pp. 221–279). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S00652601(08)60358-5 
Schwartz, T., Stevens, G., Jakobi, T., Denef, S., Ramirez, L., Wulf, V., & Randall, D. (2015). What People Do with 
Consumption Feedback: A Long-Term Living Lab Study of a Home Energy Management Sys-tem. Interacting with 
Computers, 27(6), 551–576. https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iwu009 
Scott, J. E., & Walczak, S. (2009). Cognitive engagement with a multimedia ERP training tool: Assessing computer selfefficacy 
and 
technology 
acceptance. 
Information 
& 
Management, 
46(4), 
221–232. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2008.10.003 
Sheeran, P. (2002). Intention—behavior relations: a conceptual and empirical review. European review of social 
psychology, 12(1), 1-36. 
Shevchuk, N., Oinas-Kukkonen, H., & Benson, V. (2020). Risk and social influence in sustainable smart home 
technologies. In Cyber Influence and Cognitive Threats (pp. 185–216). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12819204-7.00010-5 
Shi, Y., Xu, L., Zhou, Y., Ji, B., Zhou, G., Fang, H., Yin, J., & Deng, X. (2018). Quantifying driving factors of vegetation 
carbon stocks of Moso bamboo forests using machine learning algorithm combined with structural equation model. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 429, 406–413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2018.07.035 
Shin, Y. H., Im, J., Jung, S. E., & Severt, K. (2018). The theory of planned behavior and the norm activation model 
approach to consumer behavior regarding organic menus. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 69, 21–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhm.2017.10.011 
Shmueli, G., & Koppius, O. R. (2011). Predictive analytics in information systems research. MIS quarterly, 553-572. 
Sintov, N. D., & Schultz, P. (2017). Adjustable green defaults can help make smart homes more sustainable. 
Sustainability, 9(4), 62 
Sohaib, O., Hussain, W., Asif, M., Ahmad, M., & Mazzara, M. (2020). A PLS-SEM Neural Network Approach for 
Understanding 
Cryptocurrency 
Adoption. 
IEEE 
Access, 
8, 
13138–13150. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2960083 
Sommer, L. (2011). The Theory Of Planned Behaviour And The Impact Of Past Behaviour. International Business & 
Economics Research Journal (IBER), 10(1). https://doi.org/10.19030/iber.v10i1.930 
Ray, S., Danks, N.P., & Valdez, A.C. (2022). seminr: Building and Estimating Structural Equation Models. R package 
version 2.3.0. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=seminr 
Steemers, K., & Yun, G. Y. (2009). Household energy consumption: a study of the role of oc-cupants. Building Research 
& Information, 37(5-6), 625-637. 
Steg, L., & Groot, J. de (2010). Explaining prosocial intentions: Testing causal relationships in the norm activation model. 
The British Journal of Social Psychology, 49(Pt 4), 725–743. https://doi.org/10.1348/014466609X477745 
Sternad Zabukovšek, S., Kalinic, Z., Bobek, S., & Tominc, P. (2019). SEM–ANN based research of factors’ impact on 
extended use of ERP systems. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 27(3), 703–735. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10100-018-0592-1 
Sunstein, C. R. (2021). Green defaults can combat climate change. Nature Human Behaviour, 5(4), 548–549. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01071-2 
Sun, Y., & Li, S. (2021). A systematic review of the research framework and evolution of smart homes based on the 
internet of things. Telecommunication Systems. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11235-021-00787w 
Thunshirn, P., Ettwein, F., & Höferl, K.-M. (2025). Assessing the digital divide in the energy transition: Surveying the 
social factors influencing home energy management systems in Austria. Energy Research & Social Science, 120, 103941. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2025.103941 
Wan, H., Zhang, J., & Hwang, Y. (2025). Enhancing building resilience in cold climates: Integrating heat pump 
technologies 
with 
renewable 
energy. 
Energy 
Research 
& 
Social 
Science, 
127, 
104168. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2025.104168 

--- PAGE 22 ---

 
22 
 
 
 
Wang, Z., Zhang, B., & Li, G. (2014). Determinants of energy-saving behavioral intention among residents in Beijing: 
Extending the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy, 6(5), 53127. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4898363 
Webb, D., Soutar, G. N., Mazzarol, T., & Saldaris, P. (2013). Self-determination theory and consumer behavioural 
change: Evidence from a household energy-saving behaviour study. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 35, 59–66. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.04.003 
Wong, C. L., & Mullan, B. A. (2009). Predicting breakfast consumption: An application of the theory of planned 
behaviour and the investigation of past behaviour and executive function. British journal of health psychology, 14(3), 
489-504. 
Wong, W. E. J., Chan, S. P., Yong, J. K., Tham, Y. Y. S., Lim, J. R. G., Sim, M. A., Soh, C. R., Ti, L. K., & Chew, T. H. 
S. (2021). Assessment of acute kidney injury risk using a machine-learning guided generalized structural equation model: 
A cohort study. BMC Nephrology, 22(1), 63. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-021-02238-9 
Zhang, X., Geng, G., & Sun, P. (2017). Determinants and implications of citizens’ environmental complaint in China: 
Integrating theory of planned behavior and norm activation model. Journal of Cleaner Production, 166, 148–156. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.020 
Zharova, A., Boer, A., Knoblauch, J., Schewina, K. I., & Vihs, J. (2024a). Explainable multi-agent recommendation 
system for energy-efficient decision support in smart homes. Environmental Data Science, 3, e7. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/eds.2024.8 
Zharova, A., Loeschmann, L., & Lessmann, S. (2024b). Optimizing household energy use: An activity-based 
recommendation system for reducing CO₂ emissions. Wirtschaftsinformatik 2024 Proceedings, Article 87. 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/wi2024/87 
Zhou, B., Li, W., Chan, K. W., Cao, Y., Kuang, Y., Liu, X., & Wang, X. (2016). Smart home energy manage-ment 
systems: Concept, configurations, and scheduling strategies. Renewable and Sustainable En-ergy Reviews, 61, 30–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.03.047

--- PAGE 23 ---

 
A-1 
 
Appendix A – User Perception and User Behavior: Theories and Models 
Summarized results of the comprehensive literature review on theories and models that help explain the relationships 
between user perception and intention to use Smart Home systems for energy efficiency: 
 
Theory/Model 
Originating Author(s) 
Theory of planned behavior 
Ajzen (1985, 1991) 
Technology acceptance model 
Davis (1986,1989) 
Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology 
Venkatesh et al. (2003) 
Theory of reasoned action 
Fishbein (1967), Ajzen and Fishbein (1973, 1975) 
Uses and gratification theory 
Luo (2002) 
Health belief model 
Rosenstock et al. (1950s) 
Self-determination theory 
Deci and Ryan (1980) 
Expectation confirmation theory 
Oliver (1977, 1980) 
Mental models 
Rouse and Morris (1986), Johnson-Laird (1989) 
Prospect theory 
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) 
Stimulus-organism-response model 
Mehrabian & Russell (1974) 
Norm activation model 
Schwartz (1977) 
COM-B model 
Michie et al. (2011) 
Transtheoretical model 
Prochaska and Velicer (1997) 
Innovation diffusion theory 
Rogers (1962) 
Social exchange theory 
Homans (1958) 
Attribution theory 
Heider (1958), Weiner (1974, 1995) 
IS-continuance theory 
Bhattacherjee (2001) 
Normalization process theory 
May et al. (2009) 
Simplified abstract model of the human behavior 
Aguiar et al. (2015) 
Uses and gratification expectancy model 
Shin (2011) 
Experiential learning theory 
Kolb (1984) 
Protection motivation theory 
Rogers (1975, 1983) 
Customer satisfaction theory 
Oliver (1997) 
Personal norm theory 
Schwartz (1968, 1977) 
NASSS framework 
Greenhalgh et al. (2017) 
Service-Dominant logic 
Vargo and Lusch (2008) 
Social identity theory 
Tajfel & Turner (1986) 
Socioecological model 
McLeroy et al. (1988) 
Analytic hierarchy process methodology 
Saaty (1970) 
Social representation theory 
Moscovici (1984) 
Concept of animacy 
Piaget (1929), Hider & Simmel (1994) 
Concept of media equation 
Reeves & Nass (1998) 
Social cognitive theory 
Bandura (1977) 
Physical activity for people with a disability model 
van der Ploeg et al. (2004) 
Social cognition model of loneliness 
Hawkley and Cacioppo (2010) 
Privacy calculus model 
Culnan and Armstrong (1999) 
Attachment theory 
Bowlby (1969, 1982) 
Communications privacy management theory 
Petronio (2002) 
Impression management theory 
Goffman (1959) 

--- PAGE 24 ---

 
A-2 
 
Health action process approach 
Schwarzer (2008) 
False consensus theory 
Ross et al. (1977) 
Fuzzy set theory 
Zadeh (1965) 
Persuasive system design model 
Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa (2009) 
Self-regulation framework 
Bagozzi (1992) 
Quality-value-satisfaction-behavioral intention model 
Cronin et al. (2000) 
Self-regulation model of illness 
Leventhal et al. (1980), Leventhal et al. (1992) 
Value belief norm theory 
Stern et al. (1999), Stern (2000) 
Andersen's behavioral model of health services use 
Andersen (1995, 2008) 
Self-perception theory 
Bem (1967) 
IMB framework 
Fisher and Fisher (1992), Fisher et al. (2002) 
Norman's gulf of execution and evaluation 
Norman (1986) 
User competence theory 
Huff et al. 1992 
Elaboration likelihood model 
Petty et al. (1981), Petty and Cacioppo (1986) 
Social action theory 
Ewart (1991) 
IS success model 
DeLone & McLean (1992) 
Model of news verification behavior 
Flanagin & Metzger (2000) 
Cultivation theory 
Gerbner et al. (1994) 
KISCAP model 
Huang (2008) 
Framework of Dorrestijn 
Dorrestijn (2012, 2017) 
Task technology fit theory 
Goodhue and Thompson (1995) 
Regulatory focus theory 
Higgins (1997) 

--- PAGE 25 ---

 
C-1 
 
Appendix B - Questionnaire 
Understanding User Perception and Intention to Use 
Smart Home for Energy Efficiency 
Thank you for participating in this survey! 
With this survey, we would like to investigate the perceptions of people who are currently using smart home 
systems in their homes and how this influences their energy management and consumption behavior. 
Understanding how people are using smart home systems can help to improve the existing systems and 
optimize usability. 
In this survey, smart home is defined as a home “… in which data related to a home environment and its 
residents are obtained from sensors, electric appliances, or home gateway and transferred through a network 
of communication tools to a monitoring device or execution unit to help decide on or execute proper actions 
called services. These services are provided either automatically or directly through a remote or central control 
system to facilitate or improve the residents’ daily lives” (Kamel & Memari, 2019). The central smart home hub 
(also referred to as ‘gateway’) has a user interface, which can interact with tablets, mobile phones, or computers 
(Alaa et al., 2017). The smart home system can be connected to various applications, such as air conditioning, 
heating, ventilation, lighting, security systems, or entertainment devices, amongst others. 
Please only participate in this survey if you are a current user of a smart home. There are no right or wrong 
answers, we are only interested in your personal point of view. This survey will take approximately 10-15 
minutes. 
The survey is anonymous and cannot be tracked back to you. The data will be used for research purposes. 
 
Smart Home System 
1. Are you currently living in a home that is equipped with a smart home system?* 
[Reminder: In this survey, smart home is defined as a home “… in which data related to a home environment and its residents are 
obtained from sensors, electric appliances, or home gateway and transferred through a network of communication tools to a 
monitoring device or execution unit to help decide on or execute proper actions called services. These services are provided either 
automatically or directly through a remote or central control system to facilitate or improve the residents’ daily lives”. The central smart 
home hub (also referred to as ‘gateway’) has a user interface which can interact with tablets, mobile phones, or computers.] 
☐Yes ☐ No 
 
2. How long have you been living in a home with a smart home system? 
☐less than six months 
 
☐6-12 months 
 
☐1-3 years 
☐4-6 years 
 
 
☐7-10 years 
 
 
☐more than 10 years 
3. What is the name of the smart home system that you are using? 
[If you're using multiple systems, please list them all in the "other" section] 
☐Home Assistant 
☐Vera 
☐OpenHAB 
 
☐Other:____________ 
4. A smart home energy management system is a system that provides services to monitor and manage 
electricity generation, storage, and/or consumption in a house, and includes some form of automated 
planning. (Homan, 2020; Zhou et al., 2016) 
Are you currently using an energy management system as part of your smart home? 
☐Yes 
 
 
 
☐No 
 
 
 
☐I don’t know. 
5. Which products or systems are currently connected to your smart home? Please tick all that apply. 
☐Smart thermostat 
☐Smart plugs 
☐Smart meter 
☐Heating system 

--- PAGE 26 ---

 
C-2 
 
☐Solar panels (or other 
energy-generating devices) 
☐Light sources (f.e. smart 
bulbs) 
☐Air conditioning 
☐Ventilation 
☐Water heater 
☐Shading devices 
☐Switches 
☐Sound system 
☐Energy storage system 
☐Garage door controls 
☐Door locks 
☐Motion sensors 
☐Door and window sensors 
☐Smart TV 
☐Refrigerator 
☐Electric vehicle 
☐Stove and/or oven 
☐Dishwasher 
 
☐Washing machine 
☐Dryer 
☐Coffee machine 
☐Microwave 
☐Vacuum cleaner 
☐Mowing robots 
☐Fire/smoke/or gas detection 
☐Health-related devices 
☐Security cameras 
☐Smart speaker 
☐Streaming devices (e.g. 
Amazon Fire TV stick, Google 
Chromecast) 
☐Environmental sensors 
(such as sensors for 
temperature, humidity, light) 
☐Flood sensors 
☐Other: 
 
6. Which person in your household is mainly responsible for your smart home system? 
☐I am. ☐Responsibility is equally distributed. ☐Another household member. ☐Other:_____ 
7. Why did you decide to install a smart home system in your home? Please allocate points (0-100) to the 
listed options depending on their importance to you. All points together must equal 100. Only integer 
values may be entered in these fields. 
 
Points 
Interest in smart home technology 
 
To be more sustainable and save energy 
 
For fun and entertainment purposes 
 
To increase comfort & convenience at home 
 
To save money 
 
To better care for elders or people with disabilities (Ambient assisted living) 
 
To increase safety and security at home 
 
To have more control over my home 
 
It was already installed in the home. 
 
Other: 
 
 
= 100 
 
8. From the previous question: What other reasons influenced your decision to install a smart home 
system? 
 
 
Smart Home for Energy Management 
 
 Please indicate how you would rate the following statement. 

--- PAGE 27 ---

 
C-3 
 
[Attitude AT1] 
Very 
unpleasan
t 
Unpleasan
t 
Somewhat 
unpleasan
t 
Neutra
l 
Somewha
t pleasant 
Pleasan
t 
Very 
pleasan
t 
I think that using my smart 
home for energy management 
is/would be … 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Please indicate how you would rate the following statement. 
[Attitude AT2] 
Very 
inconvenien
t 
Inconvenien
t 
Somewhat 
inconvenien
t 
Neutra
l 
Somewhat 
convenien
t 
Convenien
t 
Very 
convenien
t 
I think that using my smart 
home for energy management 
is/would be … 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Please indicate how you would rate the following statement. 
[Attitude AT3] 
Very 
unsafe 
Unsafe 
Somewhat 
unsafe 
Neutra
l 
Somewha
t safe 
Safe 
Very 
safe 
I think that using my smart 
home for energy management 
is/would be … 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Please indicate how you would rate the following statement. 
[Attitude AT4] 
Very 
unimportan
t 
Unimportan
t 
Somewhat 
unimportan
t 
Neutra
l 
Somewha
t 
important 
Importan
t 
Very 
importan
t 
I think that using my smart 
home to reduce my 
energy consumption is … 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Please indicate how you would rate the following statement. 
[Attitude AT5] 
Very 
unhelpful 
Unhelpful 
Somewhat 
unhelpful 
Neutra
l 
Somewha
t helpful 
Helpful 
Very 
helpful 
I think that using my smart 
is/would be …to reduce my 
energy consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Please indicate how you would rate the following statements. 
[Attitude AT6, AT7] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neutra
l 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I think that using my smart 
home helps/would help me to 
better understand my own 
energy consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
My smart home helps/would 
help me to save money by 
reducing my energy 
consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
 
 
Perceptions about Smart Home for Energy Management 
Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. 
[Subjective Norm SN1-5] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagre
e 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Environmental sustainability 
and climate change are 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 

--- PAGE 28 ---

 
C-4 
 
important topics for people that 
are important to me. 
People who are important to 
me are trying to reduce their 
energy consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
People who are important to 
me would approve of me 
trying to reduce my energy 
consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
People who are important to 
me are trying to reduce their 
energy consumption by using 
their smart home. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
People who are important to 
me think that I should reduce 
my energy consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. 
[Perceived behavioral control 
PBC1-6] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagre
e 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I know how to save energy 
with my smart home. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Controlling my smart home 
through the user interface is 
easy. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I have enough time to set up 
and adjust my smart home to 
reduce my energy 
consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I have enough skills and 
experience to reduce my 
energy consumption with my 
smart home. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Reducing my energy 
consumption is out of my 
personal control. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Learning how to use my 
smart home for energy 
management was simple. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. 
[Awareness of consequences 
AC1-3] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagre
e 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
My energy consumption at 
home influences the 
environment. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I am aware of the importance 
to reduce energy consumption 
for environmental reasons. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I am concerned about climate 
change and its consequences. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. 
[Ascription of responsibility 
AR1-3] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagre
e 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Every individual is 
responsible to be more 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 

--- PAGE 29 ---

 
C-5 
 
mindful about their energy 
consumption. 
I feel personally obliged to 
reduce my energy consumption 
to the best of my ability, even if 
it is a small act of my own. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I feel guilty if I unnecessarily 
increase my energy 
consumption to improve my 
own comfort and convenience. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. 
[Personal norms PN1-3] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagre
e 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
Environmental sustainability 
is important to me. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
It is important to me to focus 
on reducing my energy 
consumption instead of using 
my smart home for 
entertainment purposes. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I feel a moral obligation to 
reduce my energy consumption 
with the help of my smart home 
system. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. 
[Behavioral Intention BI1-5] 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagre
e 
Somewha
t agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
agree 
I want to continue or start to 
use my smart home to 
manage my energy 
consumption in the 
foreseeable future. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I want to (continue to) reduce 
my energy consumption with 
the help of my smart home in 
the foreseeable future. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I am willing to change my 
energy consumption 
behavior to be more 
environmentally friendly in the 
foreseeable future. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I am willing to sacrifice some 
of my comfort to be more 
environmentally friendly. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
I want to learn how to use my 
smart home for energy 
efficiency. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Past Experiences and Motivation 
How often have you used your smart home for the following activities on average during the last twelve months? 
[Moderator: Past Behavior PB14] 
Never 
Very 
rarely 
Every 
other 
month 
Once a 
month 
Every 
other 
week 
Once a 
week 
Every 
other 
day 
Daily 
During the last twelve months, I 
have used my smart home to 
monitor my energy 
consumption. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 

--- PAGE 30 ---

 
C-6 
 
During the last twelve months, I 
have used my smart home to 
make sure that my lights or 
appliances are switched off 
when I don’t need them. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
During the last twelve months, I 
have actively tried to reduce 
my energy consumption with 
the help of my smart home. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
During the last twelve months, I 
have used my smart home to 
adjust the temperature when 
nobody is at home. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
How likely or unlikely is it that the following smart home services would motivate you to reduce your energy 
consumption? If you are already using the service, please mark the box on the very right (“Already in use”). 
 
Very 
unlikely 
Unlikely 
Neutral 
Likely 
Very likely 
Alread
y in 
use 
Receiving more actionable and easier to 
understand information on how to save 
energy at home which is personalized based 
on my past usage 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Receiving information on how much energy I 
consume compared to other people in my 
neighborhood, friends, or family 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Setting goals on how much energy I want to 
use within a specified time frame 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Receiving information about how much 
money I could save if I changed my energy 
consumption behavior 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Receiving rewards, gifts, or tax deductions 
depending on how much energy I am saving 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Receiving information on the effect my 
energy reduction would have on the 
environment 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Having a more fun and game-like smart 
home user interface 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Have you noticed any cost savings on your energy bills since installing your smart home system? 
☐Yes 
☐No 
 
☐I don’t know. 
Since using my smart home, my energy consumption … 
☐has increased. 
☐has decreased. 
☐stayed roughly the same. 
☐I don’t know. 
How would you rate the overall usability of your smart home system and/or smart home energy management 
system? 
☐Very poor 
☐Poor 
☐Okay 
☐Good 
☐Very good 
 
 
Socio-Demographics 
How old are you? 
☐18-24 ☐25-34 ☐35-44 ☐45-54 ☐55-64 ☐65+ 
What is your gender? ☐Female ☐Male 
 ☐Non-binary/other 
What is the highest level of education you have completed? 
☐Elementary School 
☐Middle School 
☐High School ☐Bachelor’s Degree 
 
 
☐Master’s Degree 
☐Doctoral Degree/advanced degree 
☐Other:__________ 
What is your current occupation status? 

--- PAGE 31 ---

 
C-7 
 
☐Employed full-time 
☐Employed part-time 
 
☐Self-employed 
 
 
☐Unemployed 
☐Student 
 
 
☐Retired 
 
☐Other: _________ 
In which country do you live? 
_______________ 
Which of the following best describes where you live? 
 
☐ City 
 
☐Town/semi-dense area 
☐Rural area 
 
Are you a … 
 
☐home owner 
☐renter 
☐other: __________? 
How many people live in your household in total (including yourself)? 
☐I live alone. 
 
☐Two people 
☐3-4 people 
 
☐5-6 people 
☐7+ 
How many of your household members are children (under 18)? 
☐0 
☐1 
☐2 
☐3 
☐4 
☐5+ 
☐prefer not to say 
 
What is the average monthly net income of your household (after taxes)? 
☐less than 1000 USD ☐1001-3000 USD 
☐3001-5000 USD 
☐5001-8000 USD 
 
☐8001-10000 USD 
☐10001-15000 USD 
☐15001-20000 USD 
☐20001-30000 USD 
☐30001-50000 USD 
☐more than 50000 USD 
 
Do you have any suggestions for improvements of smart homes and energy management systems, or feedback 
about the survey, you would like to share? 
 [Insert Text] 
Thank you very much for participating! 

--- PAGE 32 ---

1 
 
Appendix C – Descriptive Statistics and Survey Results 
 
Table C1. Overview of descriptive statistics of respondents. 
Variable 
Attribute 
Freq. 
Prop. 
Total (n) 
 
363 
100.0
% 
Gender 
Male 
342 
94.2% 
Female 
19 
5.2% 
Age 
18-24 
15 
4.1% 
25-34 
73 
20.1% 
35-44 
110 
30.3% 
45-54 
93 
25.6% 
55-64 
48 
13.2% 
65+ 
24 
6.6% 
Education 
High School and below 
135 
37.2% 
Bachelor's degree 
129 
35.5% 
Master's degree 
78 
21.5% 
Doctoral degree/advanced degree 
21 
5.8% 
Occupation 
status 
Employed full-time/Self-employed 
304 
83.7% 
Retired 
35 
9.6% 
Student/Unemployed/Part-time 
24 
6.6% 
Housing 
Homeowner 
296 
81.5% 
Renter 
67 
18.5% 
Net 
household 
income per 
month 
up to 3,000 USD 
40 
11.0% 
3,001-5,000 USD 
80 
22.0% 
5,001-8,000 USD 
93 
25.6% 
8,001-15,000 USD 
48 
13.2% 
15,001-50,000 USD 
41 
11.3% 
more than 50,000 USD 
61 
16.8% 
Country 
Germany 
191 
52.6% 
USA, Canada, UK, Australia 
107 
29.5% 
Other 
65 
17.9% 
 
 

--- PAGE 33 ---

2 
C-2 
 
Table C2. Product Overview 
 
 

--- PAGE 34 ---

3 
C-3 
 
Table C3. Ranked importance of factors influencing SH adoption. 
Variable 
Average Points (max. 100) 
Importance Ranking 
Interest in SH technology 
25.2 
1 
To increase comfort & convenience 
24 
2 
To be more sustainable and save energy 
16.4 
3 
For fun and entertainment purposes 
15.4 
4 
To have more control over my home 
14.1 
5 
To increase safety & security 
13.6 
6 
To save money 
11.5 
7 
Other 
10.8 
8 
Ambient-assisted living (AAL) 
10.3 
9 
Pre-installed 
9.4 
10 
 
 
 
Table C4. Incentives to use SH for energy efficiency. 
Incentive 
Most frequent response 
Very likely 
% 
Rewards 
Very likely 
122 
33.6% 
Potential financial savings 
Very likely 
107 
29.5% 
Easier to understand & personalized 
Likely 
87 
24.0% 
Comparative consumption 
Likely 
75 
20.7% 
Environmental effect 
Likely 
67 
18.5% 
Gamification 
Neutral 
52 
14.3% 
Goal setting 
Neutral 
43 
11.8% 
 
Table C5. Participants’ usability rating. 
Usability 
Freq. 
Prop. 
Very poor 
4 
1.1% 
Poor 
18 
5.0% 
Okay 
115 
31.7% 
Good 
153 
42.1% 
Very good 
73 
20.1% 
 

--- PAGE 35 ---

4 
C-4 
 
 
Appendix D – Results 
 
Figure D1. Error over N trees. 
 
 
Figure D2. RMSE of Grid Search Optimization Results.