--- PAGE 1 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
Available online 20 July 2023
2210-5379/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/suscom
Energy management of smart homes over fog-based IoT architecture
Muhammad Umair a,b,∗, Muhammad Aamir Cheema c, Bilal Afzal d, Ghalib Shah e
a School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2006, Australia
b Department of Electrical, Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, New Campus, University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan
c Faculty of Information Technology, MONASH University, Wellington Rd, Clayton VIC 3800, Australia
d National Centre for Cyber Security, Air University, Islamabad, Pakistan
e Sultan Qaboos IT Chair, University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Smart home
IoT
Home automation system
Energy optimization
Energy modeling
Fog-based architectures
Markov chain
A B S T R A C T
Existing research studies on home automation systems mostly conserve energy by modeling the occupancy of
users within home. Some others apply statistical approaches on the survey data about usage of appliances.
Consequently, these research works either reduce wastage of electricity through automation or achieve energy
efficiency based on appliances’ usage estimations. However, they do not provide energy consumption modeling
which is human comfort centric and also validated through practical implementation in real-world smart
homes. We present a Markov-chain-based probabilistic model to obtain users stochastic activity patterns
which are used to forecast the energy consumption in a smart home environment. These predictions are
then leveraged by our novel comfort aware energy saving mechanism named as prediction- and feedback-based
proactive energy conservation (PF-PEC) algorithm. The PF-PEC algorithm reduces the total energy consumption
while ensuring standard human comfort. Furthermore, a fog-based Internet of Things (IoT) architecture is
implemented and deployed in a smart home to efficiently incorporate the proposed algorithm in real-world
scenarios. Experimental results show up to 36% energy conservation, marking substantial reduction in daily
electricity usage.
1. Introduction
In the last decade, the proliferation of smart devices has remarkably improved and reshaped the lifestyles of their users [1]. A home
automation system (HAS) introduces smartness and intelligence within
home appliances to automate various household operations. The primal objective is to reduce the tiresome decision-making process thus
making the user’s life hassle-free and providing them with flexibility
of control [2]. An Internet of Things (IoT) enabled smart home is a
smart place where the appliances are connected to the Internet so
that every appliance is identifiable, accessible and thus controllable
across the globe [3]. IoT takes the conventional HAS systems to next
step, to improve the services of various sub-systems and expand their
outreach. The appliances are controlled based on the user activity
patterns, user preferences, and/or according to the changes in dynamic
environmental conditions. Major benefits include more rational use of
energy and other resources which in turn results in superior energy
management as well as significant time and cost savings [4].
Particularly, the energy management of smart homes has been a
focus of the research community in recent years [5]. For instance, the
∗Corresponding author at: School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2006, Australia.
E-mail address: m.umair@uet.edu.pk (M. Umair).
significance of optimizing demand side management is discussed in [6,
7]. Several research works leverage different statistical approaches to
determine user activity patterns [8–10]. Some others have conducted
user surveys to obtain energy demand and to predict energy consumption of households operations [11,12]. However, these energy
management techniques are error-prone as they rely upon appliances
data acquired through user surveys. They may under-perform when appliances’ usage routines are changed due to variations in environment
over a period of time.
Similarly, state-of-the-art Markov-chain-based solutions determine
user state probabilities to compute user activity states and their resulting impact on energy demand [13–15]. However, one of the limitations
in these approaches is that they do not consider the shared nature of
appliances’ usage for estimating the user activities and corresponding
states. In other words, the proposed models in these research works do
not determine the cumulative users’ activity patterns. Research papers
on computing household activities and predicting energy consumption
also exist in literature [16,17]. In fact, many state-of the-art predictive
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.suscom.2023.100898
Received 19 March 2020; Received in revised form 30 May 2022; Accepted 14 July 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
2
M. Umair et al.
algorithms investigated for smart homes are described in [18]. Nevertheless, the results obtained from these algorithms and prior works in
this research area are not experimentally validated in real-world smart
home environments.
In our research, a novel fog-based IoT-enabled HAS system is designed and implemented to take practical results in real-world scenarios. Therein, user surveys only serve as an initial knowledge to
the system, which will be then updated by providing a continuous
feedback about the real-time data reported from the appliances themselves. Hence, compared to traditional prediction based algorithms that
use user surveys, real-time appliances data usage will provide better
estimates of energy consumption. To the best of our knowledge, there
exists no comprehensive work on IoT-enabled smart homes that gives
thorough explanation of getting user activity patterns, and computes
state transition probabilities along with stochastic state probabilities
in order to estimate energy consumption; and in a further step, that
applies optimization algorithm on the predicted energy consumption to
reduce electricity usage in smart homes while ensuring user comfort.
This paper proposes a Markov-chain-based stochastic model to calculate user state transition probabilities which are then used to predict
the energy demand in next few time slots. Initially, user daily life
routines are acquired by conducting a survey. The survey is designed
in a way to simplify the mapping of user data to four activity states
which include absent, sleep, active and hyper-active state. The obtained
data is then processed to calculate user state transition probabilities.
These probabilities are provided as an input to the Markov chain model
which gives user state probabilities in specified time slots. In this
respect, we estimate power consumption ranges against user state probabilities that are updated later by real-time appliance usage through
feedback mechanism. Experimental results are taken to validate that
the actual energy consumption mostly stays within the range of maximum probability predicted from the model. Further, a prediction- and
feedback-based proactive energy conservation (PF-PEC) algorithm is presented to minimize electricity cost by optimizing the operation of
smart home appliances. To incorporate the proposed algorithms in
real-world scenarios, a fog-based IoT architecture for smart homes is
implemented and deployed which provides appliances control and local
data processing closer to end-users. Finally, performance evaluation of
proposed algorithms is conducted exhibiting significant reduction in
the energy consumption of a smart home. Below, we summarize our
contributions.
• We present novel algorithms that exploit human occupancy patterns for energy conservation in smart homes while ensuring
human comfort.
• We present details of our general-purpose fog-based IoT architecture for smart homes discussing its functionalities and characteristics. We create a real-world testbed by implementing the proposed
architecture in a real-world smart home system.
• We implement and deploy the proposed algorithms in our realworld testbed and conduct a detailed experimental study. The
results demonstrate that our algorithms provide significant improvement compared to the existing algorithms in terms of smart
home energy efficiency without compromising human comfort.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related work is discussed
in Section 2. Section 3 presents the details of our stochastic model
and an algorithm that estimates the energy consumption in future
timestamps. In Section 4, we introduce the proposed PF-PEC algorithm
for energy conservation in smart homes. We present our fog-based
IoT architecture for smart homes and the details of real-world testbed
in Section 5. Section 6 presents the experimental evaluations and
Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. Related work
2.1. Markov chain for energy optimization
Markov chain is a stochastic model in which the probability of each
event in a sequence depends only on the state attained in the previous
event [19]. We provide more details of Markov chain in Section 3.1
where we discuss how we apply Markov chain to obtain the user state
probabilities for our work. Several research studies propose probabilistic methods to model user behaviors [8–10,20]. Authors in [8]
established the user occupancy from sensors deployed in smart buildings. They proposed a Markov model to forecast the user occupancy.
The model outperforms the existing techniques based on probability
sampling, support vector regression and artificial neural networks for
predicting short term user occupancy. A preliminary version of our
work is presented in [21] that leverages Markov chain for energy consumption optimization. A building energy consumption model based on
stochastic Markov models is proposed in [9]. Similarly, authors in [10]
presented a four-state user occupancy model. They applied first order
Markov chain on user activity data and presented significance of their
method through correlation of occupancy states in multiple occupied
dwellings. Similarly, a stochastic model of household activity patterns
is presented in [20]. It investigates the empirical activity data and
explores patterns in form of stochastic process with memory of variable
length.
A Markov chain model is proposed in [22] to manage the power
consumption prediction to prevent overload usage of electricity. It
is a 3 state model including normal, critical and emergency states of
the load. The predicted states are then utilized in a smart residential
load management system. A Hidden Markov Model based algorithm is
proposed in [23] to predict energy consumption in Korean residential
buildings using data collected through smart meters. The model is
validated on four buildings. The results show better root mean square
error as compared to Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Support Vector
Machines (SVM) and Classification and Regression Tree (CART). The
above stated models although incorporate various factors which may
directly or indirectly influence the energy consumption, but they do
not provide the real world applications of their work in the context of
energy conservation.
2.2. Smart home energy management
A smart home energy management solution is proposed in [24]. It
considers a detailed set of attributes related to energy management in
a smart home. These attributes are then linked to each other by meaningful and useful relationships. A fuzzy logic based smart home energy
management is proposed in [25]. It classifies appliances based on their
energy consumption patterns. In this respect, a fuzzy logic is then
proposed to operate different classes of appliances. A bat algorithm
(BA) based solution with exponential inertia weight is proposed in [26]
to save energy in a smart home without deteriorating the user comfort.
Temperature, illumination, and indoor air quality are considered to
account for the user comfort. The proposed approach shows positive
results due to improved convergence behavior.
A research study in [12] proposed an algorithm which manages
household loads according to their predefined priorities and guarantees
the total power consumption below certain levels. Another research
in [14] identified several factors related to climate that can influence
the energy utilization of a building and analyzed their contribution
in energy consumption. A multi-agent model is proposed in [15] for
simulating human activities for achieving energy efficiency. Authors
in [16] developed a novel household resource allocation model which
incorporates multiple interactions (such as interaction between time of
use and energy consumption, the intra household interaction) based on
multi-linear utility functions. They endogenously represented zero consumption for both time and energy within the group decision-making

--- PAGE 3 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
3
M. Umair et al.
modeling framework. Likewise, a statistical method is presented in [17]
for modeling the behavior of home occupants to estimate residential
energy consumption. A behavioral artificial neural network model is
proposed in [27] for simulating energy consumption in smart dwellings.
A methodological framework is presented in [28] for validation of
domestic lightening model. The metrics affecting lightening behavior
are identified and lightening model according to different scenarios
are statistically evaluated. However, these models do not consider and
predict overall energy consumption of a home as they focus on limited
factors such as users’ occupancy and/or lightening demand within a
home.
2.3. Feedback mechanism and new approaches for energy optimization
The research in [29] highlights the importance of information feedback for households’ daily activities to improve the accuracy of energy consumption computations. This method gives direct feedback
to households and the information is relevant since it emanates from
their own reported activities. Authors in [30] investigated the complexity of existing models for occupancy behavior. Some of the concepts
presented in these papers [29,30] are leveraged in our model such
as the application of feedback to the system. Several models specific
to certain cultures and geography are also available in literature. For
example, in [11], a tool for predicting the total energy consumption and
associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of Australian households
is developed. It integrates the thermal efficiency of building envelope,
installed equipment, and different occupancy profiles with energy enduse modules for space and water heating, cooling, lighting, and plug-in
appliances. However, these research works deal with specific use cases
and are not generic enough to the energy demand of every geographical
region. Nowadays, homes typically have multiple power sources such as
solar, battery bank, and grid [31]. Due to COVID-19, daily routines of
people have changed and they spend more time at home. So, domestic
energy consumption has increased significantly. In this respect, a list of
new approaches towards energy management is provided in [32].
2.4. Fog-based architectures and human-comfort-based energy optimization
Many fog-based and federated-learning-based architectures have
been proposed and utilized in many applications in the past few years
due to the increasing interest in fog and edge computing [33–37]. A
novel four-tier architecture for load optimization in fog environments is
proposed in [38]. A fog computing structure is proposed for tier-3. The
proposed architecture helps in reducing fog node failures. A machine
learning classifier is proposed in [39] to reduce the energy and latency
at the fog nodes. It investigates the performance of different machine
learning classifiers on a fog node. An energy consumption model is
then proposed for the fog nodes. In [36], a fog platform termed as
EHOPES is proposed which comprises different hardware and software
capabilities. Therein, authors investigated the network requirements of
various smart living applications of IoT and presented the performance
of their proposed platform in terms of latency and throughput. The
simulation results reported in [36] showed considerable improvement
in reducing the latency. However, our proposed fog based architecture
achieves better latency results in comparison to EHOPES fog platform. A context-aware energy saving algorithm (namely M-CHESS) is
proposed in [37] which reduces energy consumption in smart home
environment considering human comfort constraints. Our proposed
solution human-centric as it also considers human comfort constraints
as per ANSI/ASHRAE standard while improving energy conservation.
Another design approach to operate HVAC in a smart home environment is proposed in [40]. It also considers the human comfort
threshold in energy consumption management. It combines the values
of humidity and temperature to define comfort zones. We compare our
PF-PEC algorithm performance with that of E-HOPES and M-CHESS
algorithms in performance evaluation Section.
3. Probabilistic model
We propose a Markov-Chain-based stochastic model which gives
probabilities of user activities in a smart home. Moreover, the proposed
model results in probabilities of consuming certain amount of power in
specified time slots. This probability versus wattage dataset will then
be used to propose an algorithm to minimize the cost of electricity considering different electricity tariffs. The user activities are categorized
into four different states. These states are named as absent, sleep, active
and hyper-active. A user can only be in one state at a given time. The
description of these user activity states is given in Table 1. User states
are defined in such a manner that each and every appliance to be used
at home is covered.
3.1. Computing user states probabilities
Initially, we conduct a survey to receive user activity patterns
throughout the day. This survey acquires information about the number
of shared and personal appliances at home. It serves as an initial
knowledge to the model and is used to calculate user activities in
specified time slots. These activity patterns constitute a state transition
matrix of a single user. It is important to mention that the user activities will be continuously updated using feedback mechanism by our
proposed algorithm. In the next step, Markov chain is applied on the
state transition matrix to compute stochastic user state probabilities.
Every user has its own state probability matrix as there is a separate
Markov process for each user. The user activity states are taken as the
Markov states. The Markov set of states are: {𝛿𝑛∶0 ≤𝑛≤3} where 0
means absent; 1 represents sleep state; 2 is active; and 3 is hyper-active
state. Whereas, 𝛿𝑛represents the 𝑛th state. Let 𝑁𝑖,𝑗denote the number
of transitions from 𝑖th state to 𝑗th which is obtained from the survey
of activity patterns of each user. Probability of transiting to 𝑗th state
from 𝑖th state is denoted as 𝑃𝑖,𝑗and is computed as:
𝑃𝑖,𝑗=
𝑁𝑖,𝑗
∑3
𝑘=0 𝑁𝑖,𝑘
(1)
Note that 𝑃𝑖,𝑗≥0 and, for every state 𝑖,
3
∑
𝑗=0
𝑃𝑖,𝑗= 1
(2)
The following 4 × 4 Markov state transition matrix is obtained from
user activity patterns:
𝑇𝑠=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑃0,0
𝑃0,1
𝑃0,2
𝑃0,3
𝑃1,0
𝑃1,1
𝑃1,2
𝑃1,3
𝑃2,0
𝑃2,1
𝑃2,2
𝑃2,3
𝑃3,0
𝑃3,1
𝑃3,2
𝑃3,3
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
where each row in 𝑇𝑠represents transition probability of transiting
from one particular state to the other states. Fig. 1 shows the state
diagram representing these activity states. It is clear from the diagram
that each state is accessible from itself and all other states. Hereafter,
unless clear from context, we use 𝑇𝑢
𝑠to denote the transition matrix for
a particular user 𝑢. We use 𝑃𝑢
𝑛(𝑡) to denote the probability that a user 𝑢
is in state 𝑛at time 𝑡where 𝑛is between 0 and 3. The state probability
matrix of a user 𝑠𝑢(𝑡) at time 𝑡can then be obtained by using its state
probability matrix at the previous time 𝑡−1 and its transition matrix
𝑇𝑢
𝑠:
𝑠𝑢(𝑡) = [𝑃𝑢
0 (𝑡)
𝑃𝑢
1 (𝑡)
𝑃𝑢
2 (𝑡)
𝑃𝑢
3 (𝑡)] = 𝑠𝑢(𝑡−1) × 𝑇𝑢
𝑠
(3)
The initial state matrix (at time 0) of a user 𝑢can be obtained
using its known state at time 0, e.g., if a user is in state 1 at 𝑡= 0
then the initial state vector is 𝑠𝑢(0) = [0
1
0
0].
Let 𝑈be the
set of all users living in a home. The sample space is a set of all
possible outcomes (represented by 𝑈𝑛) for all users 𝑈living in home,
i.e. 𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒= (𝑈𝑛)𝑈. The possible outcomes are the combinations

--- PAGE 4 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
4
M. Umair et al.
Table 1
Description of user activities.
States
Description
Absent
A user is in absent state, when he/she is outside the home.
Sleep
When a user is present in the house but not engaged in any activity. Power consumed due to
his/her presence only comprises of cooling and heating of environment in corresponding room.
Active
When a user is using his/her personal gadgets and appliances, i.e. computer, video-gaming,
chargers, etc. These appliances are other than the cooling or heating appliances.
Hyper-active
When a user is utilizing one of the shared appliances at home. Shared appliances are the ones
which are in-use of every person at home, i.e. water pump, electric geyser, electric hearth,
washing machine, etc. These appliances also do not include heating or cooling appliances.
Fig. 1. User activities state diagram.
of different user activity states. Thus, an increase in number of users
increases the sample space essentially. Power consumption depends on
the activity states of the users in the house, e.g., if all users are absent,
the power consumption is low. Several combinations may correspond to
approximately same power consumption and considering all outcomes
in the model will be redundant. Therefore, potential outcomes are
identified and only their combinations are considered. For instance,
one potential outcome is all users are in absent state; another possible
outcome is at least one user is in hyperactive state, and so on. In essence,
only those outcome combinations are selected that correspond to fairly
different power consumption. Hence, our first outcome combination
is all users in absent state. Reason to consider this combination in the
model is because in most cases, it corresponds to minimum power
consumption range in the house.
Next, we consider several possible
combinations of activity states of the users living in the house and show
how to calculate their probabilities.
All users are absent. If all of the users are in state 0 (i.e., absent), the
power consumption will be the lowest. The Markov state probability
matrix in Eq. (3) is specific to one user. The activity states of all users
are independent of each other. Therefore, to compute the probability
of more than one user in a particular state, we simply need to find their
joint probability i.e. probability that two users 𝑢and 𝑣are both in state
0 at 𝑡th time slot is 𝑃𝑢
0 (𝑡).𝑃𝑣
0 (𝑡). Probability of all users in absent state
at time 𝑡can is obtained as:
𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑙−𝑎𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡=
∏
𝑢∈𝑈
𝑃𝑢
0 (𝑡)
(4)
All users are sleeping. If the users are present in home but are sleeping
(i.e., in state 1), the power consumption will still be low but higher than
when all users are absent. The probability that all users are sleeping at
time 𝑡can be obtained as
𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑙−𝑎𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑝=
∏
𝑢∈𝑈
𝑃𝑢
1 (𝑡)
(5)
At least one user is hyper-active. The power consumption will be quite
high when at least one user is hyper-active because, as noted in Table 1,
the user will be using the shared appliances (which are usually the
high load appliances) in the home. Now, we show how to compute the
probability that at least one user is in state 3, the hyper-active state.
The probability that a user 𝑢is not in hyper-active state at time 𝑡is
(1 −𝑃𝑢
3 (𝑡)). The probability that all user are in non-hyper-active state
can be computed as ∏
𝑢∈𝑈(1 −𝑃𝑢
3 (𝑡)). Thus, the probability that at least
one user is in hyper-active state can be obtained as
𝑃1+ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒= 1 −
∏
𝑢∈𝑈
(1 −𝑃𝑢
3 (𝑡))
(6)
At least one user is active. When at least one user is active (i.e., state
2), the power consumption will be lower than the case when at least one
user is hyper-active but will be higher than when all users are asleep
or absent. Similar to Eq. (6), the probability that at least one user is
active can be computed as
𝑃1+𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒= 1 −
∏
𝑢∈𝑈
(1 −𝑃𝑢
2 (𝑡))
(7)
Equations (4) to (7) provide the probabilities of different important combinations of user states that can be used to estimate energy
consumption level. Hence, the principle defined for grouping of user
activities into states and state probability data set along with current
state of appliances (provided by feedback mechanism) help to estimate
probability of consuming a certain amount of energy at a particular
time slot. This data set is converted into a table as shown in Table 3a
and Table 3b. These tables are specific to a use case described in
Section 6. The values in these tables represent different probabilities
of all users cumulatively consuming a certain power. Next, we present
an algorithm that uses these probabilities to estimate probability of
consuming high power at a certain timeslot.

--- PAGE 5 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
5
M. Umair et al.
Algorithm 1 : Energy Consumption Modeling Algorithm
Input: User Activity Patterns
Output: 𝑃𝑐, the probability of power consumption
1: Update 𝑇𝑢
𝑎for every user
⊳where 𝑇𝑢
𝑎= Activity Pattern
2: Compute 𝑇𝑢
𝑠for every user ⊳where 𝑇𝑢
𝑠= State Transition Matrix for user
u
3: while 𝑡∈𝜏do
⊳where 𝜏= peak hours duration
4:
for each user 𝑢in 𝑈do
5:
𝑠𝑢(𝑡) = 𝑠𝑢(𝑡−1) × 𝑇𝑢
𝑠;
⊳Eq. (3)
6:
end for
7:
𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑙−𝑎𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡= ∏
𝑢∈𝑈𝑃𝑢
0 (𝑡)
⊳Eq. (4)
8:
𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑙−𝑎𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑝= ∏
𝑢∈𝑈𝑃𝑢
1 (𝑡)
⊳Eq. (5)
9:
𝑃1+ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒= 1 −∏
𝑢∈𝑈(1 −𝑃𝑢
3 (𝑡))
⊳Eq. (6)
10:
𝑃1+𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒= 1 −∏
𝑢∈𝑈(1 −𝑃𝑢
2 (𝑡))
⊳Eq. (7)
11:
𝑡+ +
12: end while
13: Compute average probability of each combination over all timeslots
considering the probabilities computed in lines 7-10
14: Using the average probabilities, estimate the probability of power
consumption 𝑃𝑐at each level
15: return 𝑃𝑐
3.2. Energy consumption modeling algorithm
In this section, we present our energy consumption modeling algorithm (see Algorithm 1) which leverages the model proposed in
Section 3.1. The algorithm employs the probabilities computed in
Eqs. (4)–(7) to estimate the energy consumption. This estimated consumption can then be used to operate appliances in an optimal way
to save energy. The probabilities are only computed for peak load
hours during which the electricity is relatively costly. Afterwards, the
estimated probabilities of high power consumption are fed to another
algorithm (Algorithm 2 to be presented in Section 4) which controls
the operation of appliances. Next, we present the details of Algorithm
1.
Algorithm 1 takes the user state transitions as an input and returns
the probability of power consumption at future timestamps. Specifically, given different ranges of power consumption (e.g., low, medium,
high), the algorithm returns, for each range, the probability that the
power consumption in future timeslots will be within this range. Firstly,
the algorithm takes user activity pattern of each user 𝑢(denoted by 𝑇𝑢
𝑎)
and computes the state transition matrix of the user (denoted as 𝑇𝑢
𝑠). It
is worth mentioning that the feedback from Algorithm 2 continuously
updates the vector 𝑇𝑢
𝑎for each user (line 1) to take into consideration
any update in the user activity pattern, thus, 𝑇𝑢
𝑠is recomputed for every
user accordingly (line 2). Then, the algorithm iterates through each
time slot 𝑡in the desired duration for which energy consumption needs
to be predicted (line 3). In our implementation, we use the algorithm
to estimate energy consumption only during the peak hours 𝜏. In each
iteration, the algorithm first updates the user state probability matrix
𝑠𝑢(𝑡) for each user 𝑢using Eq. (3) (line 5). Then, the state probability
matrices of the users are used to compute the probabilities of different
combinations using Eqs. (4)–(7) as described earlier (lines 7 to 10). In
each iteration, for each 𝑡, these probabilities are computed and stored
in an array to be used when the while loop terminates. Specifically,
the algorithm uses the stored probabilities for each 𝑡and computes the
average probability of each combination over all timestamps (line 13).
Based on these probabilities, the algorithm then estimates the probability of power consumption at each level 𝑃𝑐(line 14). For example,
if 𝑃1+ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒is quite high for each timeslot 𝑡(there is at least one
hyperactive user), then the algorithm will return a high probability
of the power consumption to be within the high range. Finally, the
algorithm returns 𝑃𝑐which is to be used by Algorithm 2 presented in
the next section.
Tables 3a and 3b in Section 6 show the output of Algorithm 1 when
deployed in our real-world testbed. This data can be used in predicting
Table 2
ANSI/ASHRAE Standard factors for thermal comfort.
Factors
Description
Metabolic rate (met)
The energy generated from human body
Clothing insulation (clo)
The amount of thermal insulation
person is wearing
Radiant temperature
The weighted average of all temperatures
from surfaces surrounding an occupant
Air velocity
Rate of air movement given distance over
time
Relative humidity
Percentage of water vapor in the air
the user behavior and power consumption of a smart home in near
future. Next, we present a novel algorithm which uses the output of
Algorithm 1 to reduce electricity cost while ensuring appropriate user
comfort.
4. Prediction and feedback based proactive energy management
algorithm
In this Section, we present our PF-PEC algorithm that ensures
reduction of appliances over-usage in a smart home during peak load
hours, i.e., when electricity cost is typically higher than the normal
rates. Considering an appliance activity is schedulable, the proposed
algorithm schedules the activity from peak load hours to non-peak
hours without affecting the users’ comfort level. It does so if there is
a strong prediction of appliance(s) usage in a peak load hour. In a
smart home, the above mentioned scheduling is achieved by scaling the
various thresholds of appliances up and down. A threshold is the particular value of any environmental factor such as temperature, humidity,
etc., which determines the switch-on or switch-off operation(s) of the
corresponding appliance(s). Hence, a change in the threshold value
implies that the operation of the appliance can be advanced or delayed.
While, a change in threshold value of an appliance is dependent upon
its current as well as future probabilities of certain amount of powerconsumption. Some other parameters are also incorporated to avoid any
compromise on user comfort.
4.1. Calibration of threshold ranges on a common scale
To propose a single energy saving algorithm for all home appliances,
it is necessary to calibrate environmental parameters on a common
scale. These parameters are measured in frequently used units, i.e. temperature is measured in degree Celsius (◦C), luminance is measured
in 𝑙𝑢𝑥and humidity is measured in percentage. To calibrate the temperature thresholds, ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55 [41] is considered.
This standard provides minimum requirements for acceptable thermal
indoor environment conditions. It establishes the acceptable ranges
of environmental parameters to achieve optimal comfort for smart
homes users. The thermal comfort is achieved by controlling the factors
mentioned in Table 2.
According to ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55, the range of Predicted
Mean Vote (PMV) for thermal comfort is −0.5 to 0.5 [42]. To make
the computations easy, some factors are assumed constant for particular
environmental conditions. A constant value of 1 is assumed for clothing
level, which considers that the user is wearing a light business suit.
Similarly, relative humidity is assumed to be 25% while the radiant
temperature is 25 ◦C.
4.2. PF-PEC algorithm operations
Algorithm 2 outlines the pseudocode of PF-PEC algorithm which
is executed in peak load hours. Peak load hours are denoted using 𝜏,
and 𝑃𝑐represents the probability of power consumption obtained from
Algorithm 1. The parameter 𝑃𝑀𝑉𝑥is initialized to 0, which represents
the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) of user comfort for an appliance 𝑥

--- PAGE 6 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
6
M. Umair et al.
Table 3a
Probabilities of specified energy consumption obtained from Algorithm (1).
KWh ranges
Time slots
8am–9am
9am–10am
10am–11am
11am–12pm
12pm–1pm
1pm–2pm
2pm–3pm
3pm–4pm
Probability of power
consumption in
KWh ranges
0.01–0.02
0
0.0003
0.0006
0.0007
0.0007
0.0007
0.0007
0.0007
0.05–3.025
0.11
0.1639
0.1878
0.1983
0.2029
0.2048
0.2057
0.2060
0.01–0.03
0.6875
0.5673
0.5143
0.4880
0.4741
0.4664
0.4620
0.4595
0.02–0.04
0.0391
0.0454
0.0452
0.0441
0.0431
0.0424
0.0420
0.0417
0.02–0.03
0.3129
0.3996
0.4308
0.4450
0.4525
0.4567
0.4590
0.4602
Actual Energy
Consumed (KWh)
Practical
0.01
0.05
0.02
0.04
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.01
Table 3b
Probabilities of specified energy consumption obtained from Algorithm (1).
KWh ranges
Time slots
4pm–5pm
5pm–6pm
6pm–7pm
7pm–8pm
8pm–9pm
9pm–10pm
10pm–11pm
11pm–12am
Probability of power
consumption in
KWh ranges
0.01–0.02
0
0.0012
0.0011
0.0009
0.0008
0.0007
0.0007
0.0007
0.05–3.025
0.6
0.3819
0.2838
0.2405
0.2215
0.2130
0.2093
0.2076
0.01–0.03
0.8250
0.6693
0.5702
0.5148
0.4895
0.4713
0.4640
0.4603
0.02–0.04
0.1250
0.0935
0.0677
0.0540
0.0473
0.0441
0.0426
0.0420
0.02–0.03
0.1200
0.2620
0.3559
0.4087
0.4360
0.4494
0.4559
0.4589
Actual Energy
Consumed (KWh)
Practical
0.027
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
(line 1). The algorithm iterates a while loop for the desired peak hours
duration (line 2). In each iteration, the algorithm computes 𝑃𝑀𝑉𝑥for
each appliance 𝑥(line 3) and its corresponding thresholds (i.e. 𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉)
in a given environment (line 4). Afterwards, it computes the overall
load of appliances in on-state at time 𝑡(line 5) along with the userstate based on the computed load (line 6). Then, the algorithm passes
the user-states to Algorithm 1 that returns 𝑃𝐶(line 7), which is used
to get average probability of consuming maximum power in remaining
peak load hours. Next, appliances in on-state are selected (line 8). For
each selected appliance (line 9), the algorithm first obtains the userdefined on-off threshold 𝑇𝑥
𝑢for the appliance (line 10). The subsequent
steps (lines 11 to line 13), are executed for these appliances if the user
defined threshold 𝑇𝑥
𝑢is greater than the threshold of human comfort
𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉for the appliance 𝑥. Therein, it computes the difference (denoted
by 𝛥) between the user-defined threshold (𝑇𝑥
𝑢) and minimum threshold
required for human comfort (𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉) (line 12). The threshold value 𝑇𝑥
𝑢
is updated based on this difference (𝛥) (line 13).
Algorithm 2 : PF-PEC Algorithm
Input: Human comfort constraints and parameters, 𝜏; peak hours duration
Output: 𝑃𝑀𝑉𝑥, 𝑇𝑥
𝑢, 𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉
1: 𝑃𝑀𝑉𝑥←0
2: while 𝑡∈𝜏do
3:
Compute 𝑃𝑀𝑉𝑥for all type of loads
4:
Compute 𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉for all type of loads
5:
Compute load in on-state at 𝑡
6:
Find user state from computed load
7:
Invoke Algorithm 1 and save value of 𝑃𝑐
8:
𝐴←Appliances in on-state at 𝑡
9:
for each appliance 𝑥in 𝐴do
10:
Obtain user defined on-off thresholds (𝑇𝑥
𝑢) of the appliance
11:
if 𝑇𝑥
𝑢> 𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉then ;
12:
𝛥= 𝑇𝑥
𝑢−𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉
13:
𝑇𝑥
𝑢= 𝑇𝑥
𝑢+ 𝑃𝑐× 𝛥
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
𝑡+ +
17: end while
18: return
In this way, the algorithm iteratively changes the threshold set
for different appliances in peak load hours without compromising on
human comfort. Moving the threshold away actually delays the switchon event of appliances based on the average probability (𝑃𝑐) of energy
usage in the house. The greater the probability, farther will be the new
threshold. Algorithm 2 also takes into account the difference between
user-defined threshold and minimum threshold required for human
comfort. If this gap is greater, user threshold moves faster to minimum
value (𝑇𝑥
𝑃𝑀𝑉). As this difference decreases, pace of threshold towards
minimum value slows down. The reduction in user threshold eventually
results in more energy saving.
It is noteworthy that Algorithm 1 is also invoked in Algorithm 2 by
passing user-states at time slot 𝑡which actually works as a feedback to
the Algorithm 1. This feedback is necessary because the user activity
patterns may change with time according to change in environment
or circumstances. Hence, there is a need to estimate user states for
current timeslot 𝑡. This makes system adaptable to the changes in user
activities. A user state is thus estimated at run time based on the
type and number of appliances in on-state and their power consumption at a certain time slot. This user state is accurately determined
using the real data obtained from the smart home. This estimated
user state is then considered by Algorithm 1 which re-computes the
probabilities according to this new data to achieve more precise results.
One immediate benefit of this feedback is that it somewhat solves the
convergence problem of Markov chain process. As the data set on which
Markov chain process operates changes consistently due to feedback,
the results produced by Markov chain process now converge after a
longer period. Another advantage of enabling feedback in the system
is achieving higher accuracy of the produced results. One drawback of
this feedback however, is that the system has to perform more number
of computations. A visual description of this feedback mechanism is
shown in Fig. 2.
To carry out all the above stated operations efficiently as well as
effectively, a fog-based architecture for IoT enabled HAS system is
designed such that the data about usage of appliances is seamlessly
fetched to the cloud. A database is maintained at the cloud to save
various forms of data sent by the appliances of a smart home. An application running on the IoT cloud thereby computes appliance usage time
for each user. Using this appliance-usage time, user states at different
time slots are computed and fed back to the Markov chain process.
Hence, analyzing appliance usage data at cloud helps in predicting
user’s current state in real-time which will then update the user activity
data. Markov chain is then applied on this latest user activity data to
arrive at new state transitions and this process repeats for every next
time slot.

--- PAGE 7 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
7
M. Umair et al.
Fig. 2. Feedback mechanism of Algorithm 2.
5. Our proposed fog-based architecture and a real-world testbed
for smart homes
In this section, we provide architectural details of the smart home
that we use as a test bed. A fog based IoT architecture for smart
homes is presented to realize the implementation of proposed energy
optimization algorithms in a smart home environment. The efficacy of
any smart home can get restrained depending upon its architecture.
Traditionally, a HAS system may under-perform due to the limitations
of underlying technology while the technology can itself under-achieve
if the hardware and/or software platforms are not chosen appropriately. IoT offers various innovative features in HAS systems such as low
complexity, power efficiency, small footprint and less communication
intensive connections to the Internet. Another critical attribute that IoT
brings to the table is data dissemination. However, this data dissemination is relatively weak in conventional smart home architectures
and resultantly the useful data or its timely relevance gets lost usually.
Hence, it is imperative to develop a fog based IoT architecture to
incorporate favorable techniques such as data analytics and machine
learning (ML) to enhance the capabilities of a smart home. A novel fog
based IoT architecture for smart homes is therefore proposed to better
utilize the algorithms for energy demand prediction and conservation
as presented in previous Sections. There are four main building blocks
of proposed architecture, i.e. Sensing and Data Acquisition, Actuations,
Fog/Edge Node and Cloud. Each of these network entities have some
predefined operating principles and standard protocols. This Section
constitutes the functional and architectural details of these entities.
5.1. Sensing and data acquisition
Sensor modules are designed for data acquisition that resides multiple sensors. The microcontroller used in these modules contains 8kB of
RAM and 16 channel 12 bit ADCs which makes it suitable for sensing
modules. For wireless connectivity, state of the art Wi-Fi System-onChip (SoC) is used. To make the operation of sensor module energy
efficient, they are equipped with 5 Volt batteries along with electrical
power lines as the backup. To attain further energy efficiency, the
sensor modules are also capable of duty cycling while their processor is
capable of going into deep sleep mode. Some front-end intelligence is
also provided within these modules to achieve better decision making
while forwarding the sensed information. These features are incorporated with reasonably smaller footprint to fulfill the requirements of
an intelligent sensor module for our fog based IoT architecture which
is illustrated in Fig. 3 along with a snapshot of sensor module.
5.2. Actuation
To enable smart actuation of appliances, an actuation module is
designed to replace existing switch outlets in conventional and smart
homes. The specifications of microcontroller used in actuation module
are similar to that of sensor modules. A Wi-Fi SoC is available for wireless connectivity. There can be multiple switches in a single actuation
module. TRIACS are used as control switches and relays are included
to cater for high load appliances. The major messages communicated
through actuation modules are about the operation of appliances. These
messages are translated into device on-off operations, fan(s) speed control, lamp dimmers, temperature settings of AC/heaters, etc. To ensure
synchronization, devices respond with acknowledgment messages upon
each actuation. The module constantly publishes its switches states via
wireless link to local server to facilitate the ML and data analytics
techniques. Actuation module snapshot is shown in Fig. 3.
5.3. IoT fog node
A large number of sensing and actuation modules are mostly installed in a smart home. To maintain the connectivity of each module
with IoT cloud can be expensive in terms of resources. There is a need of
IoT fog node that can maintain connection with the cloud while acting
as an edge device for sensor and actuation modules. It enables these
end-devices to log their data at local server and then to report it to the
cloud. Some of the benefits of fog node include low latency, network
scalability, and heterogeneity [43].
The functional architecture of our IoT fog node is depicted in Fig. 4.
It operates in two distinct modes, i.e. an online mode and an offline
mode. The offline mode ensures that appliances can be used within
the local network when Internet connectivity is not available, and
also synchronizes the appliances’ states with the cloud when Internet
connectivity is available again. The synchronization module periodically performs this synchronization and also ensures that the sync
time is not much significant as compared to user lag faced, or latency
introduced by removing the fog node. Whenever a user sets his/her
preferences, it is made sure that those preferences are saved in both
the local database on fog node and the database on the cloud. It
makes the appliances directly controllable from fog node based on
the defined user preferences. Moreover, fog node is equipped with
various constrained protocols in its communication stack. At application layer, it communicates with sensors and actuators using Message
Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) protocol. To enable user defined
intelligence in appliances, a local intelligence module is defined. In
addition, a specific service is responsible for data dissemination among
different application programming interfaces (APIs) running on IoT fog
node. Device identification and device/user authentication services are
also included. At transport layer, Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
is used along with Secure Socket Layer (SSL) for reliable and secure
connectivity of devices with the cloud. Other services including Secure
Shell (SSH), Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), Web and Android
APIs are implemented to access the fog node for configuration purposes.
The proposed fog node is implemented using Raspberry Pi 4, shown
in Fig. 3, which has a quad core processor with 1 GB RAM, Ethernet,
USB ports and Wi-Fi making it suitable for fog node. The proposed
fog node has rich resources that have the capability to manage all the
end nodes in a single smart home setup. It simplifies the management
of data from multiple smart homes on the cloud i.e., single fog node
per smart home setup. Moreover, it enables the smooth operation of
fog nodes due to reduced network overloading. There are two limiting

--- PAGE 8 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
8
M. Umair et al.
Fig. 3. Proposed fog based IoT architecture for smart home.
Fig. 4. Functional architecture of fog node.
factors in the operation of the proposed fog node: the range of the WiFi and the number of requests that can be entertained simultaneously.
Wi-Fi repeaters can be installed in relatively bigger and multi-story
dwellings to enhance the range. Simultaneous requests in a fog node
can be entertained by using threads. However, increasing the number of
threads overload the fog node and creates a lag in fulfilling the requests.
In the proposed fog node, a high number of requests can be entertained
simultaneously because we are using a high-end device.
5.4. IoT cloud
Our smart home architecture includes customized implementation
of IoT cloud whose functional diagram is shown in Fig. 5. The IoT cloud
is equipped with multiple services and plug-ins to facilitate interaction
with fog node, users and developers. TCP/IP stack is incorporated
to provide connection oriented services together with SSL for secure
communication. Our Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 are implemented in
the cloud within Machine Learning module. Data dissemination layer
is integrated to classify the data reported from appliances as well
as sensor devices and to disseminate it to concerned services before
saving into database. A copy of database is continuously replicated
to another Virtual Machine (VM) in the cloud to incorporate ML and
data analytics techniques without compromising the original data reported from appliances. Relaying service is responsible to entertain the
service-accessibility requests for a specific device originated from users.
Customized Android and Web APIs are designed to enable flexible
control over appliances in a smart home. A monitoring module is responsible for generating alerts/warnings. FTP, SFTP and SSH protocols
are also employed.
5.5. Real-world scenario to operate the test bed
The experiments are conducted on a real-world smart home system.
We leverage the proposed system architecture presented in this section
to implement a smart home system. A fog node, two sensor nodes and
one actuation module is used in the test bed. The implemented smart
home system is connected to the cloud being implemented using the architecture proposed in Fig. 5. It is worth mentioning that the deployed
system have a centralized database in which the on-off thresholds of
appliances are saved. These thresholds are set by the corresponding
users. These thresholds are used by our proposed algorithms to operate
the appliances accordingly. Algorithms 1 and 2 are deployed on the
cloud. The outcome of Algorithm 2 is used to send commands to the
fog node to operate the appliances accordingly.
The energy consumption model is validated by the experiments
conducted in a 1125 square feet home with 3 occupants. It is a multistory dwelling located in Lahore. Eight spots in the home are identified
for system deployment. The experiments are conducted during spring
season. All the occupants have different daily routines. First is a parttime worker, second is a housewife and third one is a retired person
who normally stays at home. The results are taken from morning (8am)
to midnight (12am).
6. Experiments and results
In this Section, the performance analysis of proposed algorithms is
presented. Firstly, the prediction results of energy consumption estimation model (Algorithm 1) are discussed followed by the evaluation of
proposed PF-PEC (Algorithm 2) which reduces the energy consumption
of a smart home. The probability distribution of a particular user in
different states at each time slot is shown in Fig. 6. It should be noted
that our model includes all the appliances in use within a home.
The numerical results are illustrated in Table 3a and 3b. In that
respect, different KWh ranges are specified that corresponds to the
potential combination of outcomes considered by Algorithm 1. The
predicted power consumption is provided in terms of the probability
of consuming energy in a particular KWh range for different time slots.
The values in Table 3a and 3b are not specific to a single user. These
probabilistic values represent the likelihood of all users cumulatively
consuming a certain power. The real energy consumed (KWh) at each

--- PAGE 9 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
9
M. Umair et al.
Fig. 5. Functional architecture of IoT cloud.
Fig. 6. Example of probability distribution of single user in four states.
Fig. 7. Comparison between actual and predicted energy consumption.
time slot is also reported in the table and can be compared with the
KWh range of highest probability event. For example, in 3a for time
slot 8am–9am, the actual energy consumed is 0.01 KWh whereas the
corresponding predicted KWh range, i.e. 0.01–0.03, has the highest
probability. Similarly, for other time slots, the results obtained from
our energy consumption prediction model in terms of KWh ranges and
their corresponding probabilities fairly match with that of actual energy
consumption of the smart home. In Fig. 7, the percentage similarity

--- PAGE 10 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
10
M. Umair et al.
Table 4
Results of PF-PEC Algorithm (2), lights and fan readings.
Days
Manual
Smart
Smart + PF-PEC Algorithm
Light 1
Light 2
Fan
Light 1
Light 2
Fan
Light 1
Light 2
Fan
Monday
6 h,3 m,9 s
6 h,3 m,9 s
6 h,3 m
5 h,49 m
5 h,49 m
5 h,58 m
4 h,54 m
4 h,54 m
5 h,45 m
Tuesday
6 h,42 m
6 h,42 m
6 h,42 m
6 h
6 h
6 h
4 h,1 m
3 h,51 m
5 h,46 m
Wednesday
7 h,32 m
7 h,32 m
7 h,32 m
5 h,50 m
5 h,50 m
6 h,1 m
3 h,18 m
1 h,18 m
5 h,37 m
Thursday
6 h,49 m
6 h,49 m
6 h,49 m
6 h,27 m
6 h,27 m
6 h,38 m
3 h,35 m
35 m
6 h,22 m
Friday
7 h,5 m
7 h,5 m
7 h,5 m
5 h,33 m
5 h,33 m
7 h,5 m
3 h56 m
6 m
6 h,48 m
Fig. 8. Mean Absolute Error results to determine prediction accuracy.
of predicted energy consumption with that of actual is shown on 𝑦axis and the events probabilities are shown on 𝑥-axis. This similarity
measure is simply the percentage number of predictions matching with
actual power consumption. It shows that the highest probability events
in 3a and 3b have more chances to correctly predict the actual energy
usage which in turn means that the actual energy consumed have
more chances of falling in the KWh range of highest probability event.
These chances gradually decrease if we move towards lower probability
events. As the user states are defined on the basis of their appliances usage and number of appliances installed at home are pre-known, so KWh
ranges are calculated using the information from feedback mechanism
about user activity and the amount of load active at that time. So, user
survey and feedback data helps to estimate the KWh range against each
useful combination of user activity states which are aforementioned in
Section 3. Thus, Fig. 7 demonstrates that actual energy consumption
is very much closer to the highest probability event predicted by the
model. Moreover, to validate the predicted results, Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) is used as an evaluation criteria as shown in Fig. 8. It is evident
that Mean Absolute Error for highest probability event (also mentioned
in Fig. 7) is least whereas its value increases as we move towards lower
probability events. More specifically, MAE for highest probability event
is only 0.008 which shows the accuracy of prediction algorithm.
Algorithm 2 is tested in a different scenario as compared to Algorithm 1. The performance of PF-PEC algorithm is validated in an
office equipped two lights, one fan and an AC, with a single occupant from 9:00am to 5:00pm for five working days. The light and
temperature sensors are installed on the walls and accordingly PMVs
for human comfort are calculated. Initially, Algorithm 1 is applied
on user activity data and probabilities are generated against power
consumption. Afterwards, Algorithm 2 is applied on this data to optimize the appliances’ usage in peak load hours. The experimental
results are considered for a duration of one week as shown in Table 4. It shows the daily time period for which both lights and a fan
Fig. 9. Comparison of PF-PEC algorithm with baseline and simple smart home.
remained in on-state. These results validate that the PF-PEC algorithm
further reduces energy consumption of a smart home. Fig. 9 graphically
demonstrates these energy consumption in three different scenarios,
i.e. manual home (normal operations with manual switches), smart
home (occupancy, temperature and luminance based intelligence), and
smart home with PF-PEC algorithm. It can be visualized that appliances
usage decreases further when we simultaneously apply smartness and
PF-PEC algorithm. Additional analysis determines that Light 2 and fan
usage timings are reduced further after applying PF-PEC algorithm.
This reduction in Light 2 usage is essentially due to the fact that only

--- PAGE 11 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
11
M. Umair et al.
Fig. 10. Event response time results with and without fog node.
Fig. 11. Comparison of our architecture with EHOPES fog platform.
one light serves the purpose according to the visual comfort threshold
of the user.
Fig. 10 shows the performance comparison of monitoring results
with and without fog node in terms of average response time of
different independent events along with their corresponding energy
consumption. Therein, a single event is defined by ‘a message communicated by sensor/actuation module to the cloud or fog node with a
specific payload size, number of MYSQL queries executed and messages
exchanged with other applications at the cloud or fog node, and finally
sending back an acknowledgment (ACK) which completes an event
cycle’. It can be visualized that the average event response time and
corresponding energy consumption is remarkably reduced with the
introduction of fog node in smart home architecture.
Similarly, in Fig. 11 we compare the latency results calculated with
our proposed architecture with the average latency results achieved
with another fog architecture based platform for smart environments,
termed as EHOPES [36]. It can be seen that the average latency results
in our case are reasonably better than the latency results attained with
that of EHOPES platform. These improvements are achieved due to
the modular implementation of architectural functionalities of fog node
and its seamless interaction with cloud architecture.
Finally, the percentage energy conservation corresponding to different PMVs is shown in Fig. 12. It provides the comparison of PF-PEC
algorithm with M-CHESS algorithm proposed recently [37]. Therein,
the authors reduced the energy consumption of smart home considering various human comfort thresholds. In particular, the M-CHESS
algorithm sacrifices the human comfort to attain higher energy savings.
Thus, as shown in Fig. 12, the M-CHESS algorithm achieves energy
conservation up to 33.7% with human comfort threshold of 1.0 which is
increased to 38.6% by further compromising human comfort threshold
to 1.5. On the contrary, PF-PEC provides the energy conservation up
to 36% while achieving the human comfort threshold of 0.5 as per the
ASHRAE standard. Therefore, the M-CHESS algorithm though flexibly
change the human comfort range to attain more energy conservation.
However, the average energy savings achieved by PF-PEC algorithm
for a similar value of PMV is always higher than that of M-CHESS
algorithm. Hence, our PF-PEC algorithm improves the human comfort
as well as energy savings in a smart home.
7. Conclusion
The paper presents energy management and optimization techniques to minimize energy consumption in smart dwellings. A Markov

--- PAGE 12 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
12
M. Umair et al.
Fig. 12. PF-PEC algorithm comparison with an energy saving scheme (M-CHESS) that
considers standard human comfort level.
chain model is proposed to compute probabilities of power consumption in different time slots. This data set is leveraged by our prediction
and feedback based energy management algorithm which minimizes
energy consumption during peak load hours. To efficiently incorporate the proposed algorithms in a real world scenario, a fog based
IoT architecture is implemented. Experimental evaluations are conducted in a home having 3 occupants. Experiments reveal that the
forecasted energy estimates are very close to actual energy consumed
within home. Moreover, it is observed that the energy consumption and
electricity costs are significantly reduced without degrading standard
human comfort. We consider that this work can be instrumental for
employing proactive and precise demand side management in future
energy systems.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Muhammad Umair: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Resources. Muhammad Aamir Cheema: Methodology,
Data curation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Visualization,
Investigation. Bilal Afzal: Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing, Supervision, Visualization. Ghalib Shah: Writing - Review &
Editing, Supervision, Visualization, Project administration.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] Bilal Afzal, Muhammad Umair, Ghalib Asadullah Shah, Ejaz Ahmed, Enabling
iot platforms for social iot applications: vision, feature mapping, and challenges,
Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 92 (2019) 718–731.
[2] Davit Marikyan, Savvas Papagiannidis, Eleftherios Alamanos, A systematic review
of the smart home literature: A user perspective, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change
138 (2019) 139–154.
[3] Zahrah A. Almusaylim, Noor Zaman, A review on smart home present state and
challenges: linked to context-awareness Internet of Things (IoT), Wirel. Netw. 25
(6) (2019) 3193–3204.
[4] A.R. Al-Ali, Imran A. Zualkernan, Mohammed Rashid, Ragini Gupta, Mazin
Alikarar, A smart home energy management system using IOT and big data
analytics approach, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 63 (4) (2017) 426–434.
[5] Jinsoo Han, Chang-Sic Choi, Wan-Ki Park, Ilwoo Lee, Sang-Ha Kim, Smart home
energy management system including renewable energy based on ZigBee and
PLC, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 60 (2) (2014) 198–202.
[6] Adia Khalid, Nadeem Javaid, Mohsen Guizani, Musaed Alhussein, Khursheed Aurangzeb, Manzoor Ilahi, Towards dynamic coordination among home appliances
using multi-objective energy optimization for demand side management in smart
buildings, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 19509–19529.
[7] Minyoung Sung, Younghoo Ko, Machine-learning-integrated load scheduling for
reduced peak power demand, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 61 (2) (2015)
167–174.
[8] Zhaoxuan Li, Bing Dong, A new modeling approach for short-term prediction of
occupancy in residential buildings, Build. Environ. 121 (2017) 277–290.
[9] João Virote, Rui Neves-Silva, Stochastic models for building energy prediction
based on occupant behavior assessment, Energy Build. 53 (2012) 183–193.
[10] Eoghan McKenna, Michal Krawczynski, Murray Thomson, Four-state domestic
building occupancy model for energy demand simulations, Energy Build. 96
(2015) 30–39.
[11] Zhengen Ren et al., A model for predicting household end-use energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions in Australia, Int. J. Sustain. Build. Technol.
Urban Dev. 4 (3) (2013) 210–228.
[12] Manisa Pipattanasomporn, Murat Kuzlu, Saifur Rahman, An algorithm for intelligent home energy management and demand response analysis, IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid 3 (4) (2012) 2166–2173.
[13] A.D. Wills, Ian Beausoleil-Morrison, V.I. Ugursal, Adaptation and validation of an
existing bottom-up model for simulating temporal and inter-dwelling variations
of residential appliance and lighting demands, J. Build. Perform. Simul. 11 (3)
(2018) 350–368.
[14] Zhun Yu, et al., A systematic procedure to study the influence of occupant behavior on building energy consumption, Energy Build. 43 (6) (2011)
1409–1417.
[15] Edouard
Amouroux,
Thomas
Huraux,
François
Sempé,
Nicolas
Sabouret,
Yvon Haradji, Simulating human activities to investigate household energy
consumption, in: ICAART (2), 2013, pp. 71–80.
[16] Biying Yu, Junyi Zhang, Akimasa Fujiwara, A household time-use and energyconsumption model with multiple behavioral interactions and zero consumption,
Environ. Plan. B: Plann. Des. 40 (2) (2013) 330–349.
[17] Brandon Johnson, et al., A method for modeling household occupant behavior to
simulate residential energy consumption, in: Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Conference (ISGT), IEEE PES, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5.
[18] Shaoen Wu, et al., Survey on prediction algorithms in smart homes, IEEE Internet
Things J. (2017).
[19] Paul
A
Gagniuc,
Markov
Chains:
From
Theory
to
Implementation
and
Experimentation, John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[20] José Luis Ramírez-Mendiola, Philipp Grünewald, Nick Eyre, Residential activity
pattern modelling through stochastic chains of variable memory length, Appl.
Energy 237 (2019) 417–430.
[21] Muhammad Umair, Ghalib A. Shah, Energy management of smart homes, in:
2020 IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing, SMARTCOMP, IEEE,
2020, pp. 247–249.
[22] Cristian Chiñas-Palacios, Jesus Aguila-Leon, Carlos Vargas-Salgado, Edith X.M.
Garcia, Julian Sotelo-Castañon, Elías Hurtado-Perez, A smart residential security
assisted load management system using hybrid cryptography, Sustain. Comput.
Inform. Syst. 32 (2021) 100611.
[23] Israr Ullah, Rashid Ahmad, DoHyeun Kim, A prediction mechanism of energy
consumption in residential buildings using hidden markov model, Energies 11
(2) (2018) 358.
[24] Djamel Saba, Youcef Sahli, Abdelkader Hadidi, An ontology based energy
management for smart home, Sustain. Comput. Inform. Syst. 31 (2021) 100591.
[25] Rabiya Khalid, Nadeem Javaid, Muhammad Hassan Rahim, Sheraz Aslam, Arshad
Sher, Fuzzy energy management controller and scheduler for smart homes,
Sustain. Comput. Inform. Syst. 21 (2019) 103–118.
[26] Mohamad Razwan Abdul Malek, Nor Azlina Ab Aziz, Salem Alelyani, Mohamed
Mohana, Farah Nur Arina Baharudin, Zuwairie Ibrahim, Comfort and energy
consumption optimization in smart homes using bat algorithm with inertia
weight, J. Build. Eng. 47 (2022) 103848.
[27] Zhipeng Deng, Qingyan Chen, Simulating the impact of occupant behavior on
energy use of HVAC systems by implementing a behavioral artificial neural
network model, Energy Build. (2019).
[28] Da Yan, Xiaohang Feng, Yuan Jin, Chuang Wang, The evaluation of stochastic
occupant behavior models from an application-oriented perspective: Using the
lighting behavior model as a case study, Energy Build. 176 (2018) 151–162.
[29] Anders Nilsson, Misse Wester, David Lazarevic, Nils Brandt, Smart homes, home
energy management systems and real-time feedback: Lessons for influencing
household energy consumption from a Swedish field study, Energy Build. 179
(2018) 15–25.
[30] Isabella Gaetani, Pieter-Jan Hoes, Jan L.M. Hensen, Occupant behavior in
building energy simulation: Towards a fit-for-purpose modeling strategy, Energy
Build. 121 (2016) 188–204.
[31] Muhammad Umair, Bilal Afzal, Asad Khan, Atiq Ur Rehman, Y. Ahmet Sekercioglu, Ghalib A. Shah, Self-configurable hybrid energy management system for
smart buildings, in: 2018 15th International Conference on Control, Automation,
Robotics and Vision, ICARCV, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1241–1246.

--- PAGE 13 ---

Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems 39 (2023) 100898
13
M. Umair et al.
[32] Muhammad Umair, Muhammad Aamir Cheema, Omer Cheema, Huan Li, Hua
Lu, Impact of COVID-19 on IoT adoption in healthcare, smart homes, smart
buildings, smart cities, transportation and industrial IoT, Sensors 21 (11) (2021)
3838.
[33] Mohammad Sadegh Aslanpour, Adel N. Toosi, Muhammad Aamir Cheema, Raj
Gaire, Energy-aware resource scheduling for serverless edge computing, in:
The 22nd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet
Computing, CCGrid, 2022.
[34] Mohammad S. Aslanpour, Adel N. Toosi, Raj Gaire, Muhammad Aamir Cheema,
WattEdge: A holistic approach for empirical energy measurements in edge
computing, in: International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing, ICSOC,
2021, pp. 531–547.
[35] Junaid Akram, Muhammad Umair, Rutvij H Jhaveri, Muhammad Naveed
Riaz, Haoran Chi, Sharaf Malebary, Chained-drones: blockchain-based privacypreserving framework for secure and intelligent service provisioning in internet
of drone things, Comput. Electric. Engrg. 110 (2023) 108772.
[36] Jianhua Li, Jiong Jin, Dong Yuan, Marimuthu Palaniswami, Klaus Moessner,
EHOPES: Data-centered fog platform for smart living, in: Telecommunication
Networks and Applications Conference (ITNAC), 2015 International, IEEE, 2015,
pp. 308–313.
[37] Ching-Hu Lu, et al., Context-aware energy saving system with multiple comfortconstrained optimization in M2M-based home environment, IEEE Trans. Autom.
Sci. Eng. 14 (3) (2017) 1400–1414.
[38] Shivi Sharma, Hemraj Saini, A novel four-tier architecture for delay aware
scheduling and load balancing in fog environment, Sustain. Comput. Inform.
Syst. 24 (2019) 100355.
[39] Nagender Kumar Suryadevara, Energy and latency reductions at the fog gateway
using a machine learning classifier, Sustain. Comput. Inform. Syst. 31 (2021)
100582.
[40] Daniel Fernando Espejel-Blanco, Jose Antonio Hoyo-Montano, Jaime Arau,
Guillermo Valencia-Palomo, Abel Garcia-Barrientos, Hector Ricardo HernandezDe-Leon, Jorge Luis Camas-Anzueto, HVAC control system using predicted mean
vote index for energy savings in buildings, Buildings 12 (1) (2022) 38.
[41] Standard 55-Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy, ASHRAE
American
Society
of
Heating,
Refrigerating
and
Air-conditioning
Engineers, (ISSN: 1041-2336) 2013, Available: https://www.ashrae.org/resources--
publications/bookstore/standard-55-and-user-s-manual.
[42] Jermy Thomas, Tiffany Swenson, Amanda D Smith, Quantifying the importance
of measured metabolic rates and clothing levels for effectively using a predicted
mean vote model: A global sensitivity analysis, ASHRAE Trans. 125 (2019).
[43] Mohammad Aazam, Sherali Zeadally, Khaled A Harras, Deploying fog computing
in industrial Internet of Things and Industry 4.0, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. (2018).
Muhammad Umair is a PhD student at the School of
Computer Science, The University of Sydney. He is also
a Lecturer at the Department of Electrical, Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineering, New Campus, UET Lahore.
He completed his B.Sc. Electrical Engineering and M.Sc.
Electrical Engineering from University of Engineering and
Technology (UET) Lahore in 2014 and 2017, respectively.
He has worked as a Research Officer at Internet of Things
(IoT) lab at Al-Khwarizmi Institute of Computer Sciences,
UET Lahore. He has also worked at Sultan Qaboos IT
Research lab as a Research Officer. His survey on Social
IoT platforms is the most cited survey for SIoT applications.
He has designed graduate level courses on IoT. His areas of
interests include Internet of Things, Embedded Systems, Network Systems, Machine Learning, Algorithms Development,
Pervasive Computing, Ubiquitous Computing, Cloud Based
Systems, Data Analytics and working on application layer
of any of the defined problems.
Muhammad Aamir Cheema is an ARC Future Fellow,
an Associate Professor and Director of Research at the
Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity, Faculty
of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia.
He obtained his PhD from UNSW Australia in 2011. He is
the recipient of 2012 Malcolm Chaikin Prize for Research
Excellence in Engineering, 2013 Discovery Early Career
Researcher Award, 2014 Dean’s Award for Excellence in
Research by an Early Career Researcher, 2018 Future Fellowship, 2018 Monash Student Association Teaching Award
and 2019 Young Tall Poppy Science Award. He has also
won two CiSRA best research paper of the year awards,
two invited papers in the special issue of IEEE TKDE on the
best papers of ICDE, and three best paper awards at ICAPS
2020, WISE 2013 and ADC 2010, respectively. He is the
Associate Editor of IEEE TKDE and DAPD and served as PC
co-chair for ADC 2015, ADC 2016, 8th ACM SIGSPATIAL
Workshop ISA 2016 & 2018, IWSC 2017, proceedings chair
for DASFAA 2015 & ICDE 2019.
Bilal Afzal is a graduate from National University of Science
and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. He has worked as
Research Officer and Senior Research Officer at KICS, UET
Lahore, Pakistan. His research interests include Computer
and Wireless Networks, Internet of Things (IoT), IoT Security, and 5G radio technology. He has served as the
program committee member, co-chair and session manager
in several IEEE conferences. He is regular reviewer of
many impact factor journals including Elsevier FGCS, JNCA,
COMPELECENG, SAGE JDSN, IEEE Network Magazine, and
IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine.
Dr. Ghalib A. Shah is an IEEE Senior Member, and Professor at the Department of Cyber Security, Air University
Islamabad. He has worked as a Sultan Qaboos IT Co-Chair at
UET Lahore. He joined Al-Khawarizmi Institute of Computer
Science, UET Lahore in 2012 and established Internet of
Things (IoT) Lab, where he received many research grants
from HEC and ICT R & D Fund and several projects are
in progress at this Lab. He also received a research grant
for Cyber Security in IoT and is working on many projects.
He actively works in the area of communication protocols
and cyber security in IoT. Dr. Shah started his academic
career at College of EME, National University of Sciences
and Technology Islamabad as an Assistant Professor in 2007
and served for three years. He has been at the School of
Computer Science, Australian National University as a visiting research fellow during 2009-10. He then joined the Next
Generation Wireless Networks Lab, Koc University, Istanbul
as a Research fellow and produced significant research
publications in the area of cognitive radio sensor networks.
Dr Shah received his B.Sc. major Math and M.Sc degree
in Computer Science from Bahauddin Zakariya University
Multan, Pakistan in 1997 and 2000 respectively and PhD
degree in computer engineering from Middle East Technical
University, Ankara Turkey in January 2007.