--- PAGE 1 ---

Preprint 
1 
 
Energy and GHG saving potentials of 
sufficiency measures - a synthesis for 
Germany 
Carina Zell-Ziegler1,2,a, Célia Burghardt3, Kaya Dünzen4, David Schöpf5, Jenny Kurwan5, Benjamin 
Best6, Mirko Schäfer3, Frauke Wiese7 
 
1 Oeko-Institut, Borkumstr. 2, 13189 Berlin, Germany 
2 Technische Universität Berlin, Straße des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany 
3 INATECH, University of Freiburg, Emmy-Noether-Str. 2, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 
4 Oeko-Institut, Merzhauser Straße 173, 79100 Freiburg, Germany 
5 Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy, Döppersberg 19, 42103 Wuppertal, 
Germany 
6 City of Bonn, Climate Neutral Bonn 2035 Program Office, Bonn, Germany 
7 Europa-Universität Flensburg, Auf dem Campus 1, Flensburg 24941, Germany 
 
a Corresponding author: c.zell-ziegler@oeko.de 
 
Abstract 
The sixth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
emphasises the potential of demand-side measures, such as sufficiency, for mitigating climate 
change. Although quantified potentials of various sufficiency measures exist, policy advisors and 
energy modellers criticise the lack of findability and comparability of the relevant data. Due to the 
high level of heterogeneity in units, reference points and calculation methods, the data cannot be 
used to summarise sufficiency potentials at a national level. Consequently, this paper aims to 
identify, structure, harmonise and synthesise existing data in order to determine the greatest 
saving potentials per sector and highlight data gaps. Based on a systematic literature review, we 
have created a curated open-source database containing over 300 quantified energy and 
greenhouse gas (GHG) saving potentials for Germany, which could be used as a blueprint for 
other such data collections. Most quantifications were available for the building sector, particularly 
for appliances. The highest total energy and GHG emission savings in Germany were identified 
in measures that reduce per capita living space, with saving potentials of -150 Terawatt-hours per 
year (TWh/a) and -118 Million Tons of Carbon Dioxide Equivalents per year (Mt CO2eq./a; this 
measure also includes lower heating temperatures). This synthesis can help modellers to better 
account for sufficiency potentials in scenarios, and help policymakers to understand the saving 
potentials of sufficiency. We encourage researchers to quantify more energy and GHG saving 
potentials in order to fill the identified gaps and to use the proposed synthesis structure. 

--- PAGE 2 ---

Preprint 
2 
 
Keywords 
Literature review; Database; Sufficiency; Energy sufficiency; Saving potentials; Demand-side 
modelling 
1. Introduction 
1.1. The role and status of energy sufficiency (policy) 
As the climate crisis intensifies and efforts to combat climate change need to be increased, 
demand-side options and particularly those that go beyond green growth have become part of 
discussions (Akenji 2014; Lorek and Spangenberg 2014; Wachsmuth and Duscha 2019; IPCC 
2022; Creutzig et al. 2024; Sugiyama et al. 2024). One of the discussed concepts for 
implementation is energy sufficiency (Darby and Fawcett 2018; Sandberg 2021; JungellMichelsson and Heikkurinen 2022; Lage 2022). 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) acknowledged for the first time in 2022 
that sufficiency is a key strategy for climate change mitigation and described sufficiency policies 
as “a set of measures and daily practices that avoid demand for energy, materials, land, and water 
while delivering human well-being for all within planetary boundaries” (IPCC 2022, p. 35). This 
dual focus on individual behaviours and systemic policies underscores the comprehensive scope 
of sufficiency as a sustainability strategy. 
 
While there are various interpretations of energy sufficiency, all converge on a shared vision of 
reducing consumption and production to achieve environmental sustainability. This paper adopts 
the understanding and definition proposed by Lage et al. (2023) as “a strategy for reducing, in 
absolute terms, the consumption and production of end-use products and services through 
changes in social practices in order to comply with environmental sustainability while ensuring an 
adequate social foundation for all people”. Table 2 in their paper presents exemplary sufficiency 
measures per sector. The emphasis on the social and equity aspect of energy sufficiency (social 
foundation), which is also found in the IPCC definition, is an important addition to the discussion 
on climate change mitigation efforts towards a just transition. It aligns with current research on 
well-being: demand-side options have been shown to be consistent with high levels of well-being 
(Creutzig et al. 2022a). 
 
Another advantage of the energy sufficiency strategy is its multi-solving nature as it addresses 
different and interrelated objectives simultaneously. These include decarbonisation (chapter 1.2 
looks at this in more detail), staying within planetary boundaries, limiting resource use, advancing 
sustainable development goals and promoting equity (Piketty and Chancel 2015; Roy et al. 2021; 
Wuppertal Institut 2023; SRU 2024). Unlike other approaches, which often involve trade-offs or 
the risk of undermining complementary goals, sufficiency seeks to minimise these by targeting 
multiple sustainability goals. For example, strategies such as the expansion of renewable energy 
or negative emission technologies may inadvertently lead to increased resource demand or 

--- PAGE 3 ---

Preprint 
3 
 
inequalities in access to these resources because of high systemic costs. Reducing energy 
demand by means of sufficiency measures reduces the pressure to tap these options at 
unsustainable rates (Wiese et al. 2022, 2024a). 
 
Researchers also shed light on different further aspects of sufficiency, its role within climate 
change mitigation and its governance: Sandberg (2021) provides nuance by identifying four types 
of consumption changes inherent to sufficiency, namely absolute reduction, modal shift, product 
longevity and sharing practices. These aspects emphasise the multifactorial nature of sufficiency, 
which operates not only at the individual level but also through broader political and systemic 
changes. Lage (2022) describes various notions of sufficiency and defines three different 
approaches to realising a transition towards sufficiency: a bottom-up-approach, a policy-makingapproach and a social-movement-approach. Dablander et al. (2025) describe actions that 
different actors such as policymakers, businesses, NGOs, research, media / arts and civil society 
can take and are already taking towards sufficiency. Zell-Ziegler et al. (2025) present a collection 
of more than 350 policy instruments for different sectors, showing how sufficiency can be put into 
practice. This collection also includes some implementation examples. All of these authors 
emphasise the importance of sufficiency governance and policy instruments that create good 
framework conditions for the shift in social practices and cultural norms. However, as research 
also confirms, sufficiency as a policy instrument is still underrepresented in the current policy mix 
for decarbonising the economy and mitigating climate change (Zell-Ziegler et al. 2021; Lage et al. 
2023). 
1.2. Sufficiency potentials in the existing literature 
In this article, we focus on the saving potentials of energy sufficiency expressed as greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emission and energy savings. There is a range of studies (peer-reviewed and grey) 
that has explored these saving potentials for different geographic scopes: On the global scale, 
the IPCC (2022) summarises the existing research and highlights a significant emission reduction 
potential of all demand-side strategies, ranging from 40-70 % in the end-use sectors buildings, 
land transport, and food (Creutzig et al. 2022b, p. 505). In another paper, Creutzig et al. (2022a) 
even set the potential at a 40-80 % reduction in end-use sector emissions brought about by sociobehavioural, infrastructural and technological options. In their low-energy demand scenario, 
Grubler et al. (2018) predict a 40 % overall reduction in final energy consumption by 2050 
compared to 2018 levels, with the Global North achieving a reduction of almost 55 %. This would 
be achieved through, among other measures, the large-scale replacement of carbon-intensive 
steel with other materials and a halving of flight kilometres. Comparable scenarios which integrate 
lifestyle changes and sufficiency on the global level are provided, for example, in van Den Berg 
et al. (2024), which state a 39 % emission reduction in 2050 in the Global North in the transport 
and residential sectors compared to a baseline scenario. 
 
At the regional level, the CLEVER scenario (Collaborative Low Energy Vision for the European 
Region) outlines an ambitious mitigation path. It specifies that the final energy demand in 2050 
will more than halve, with at least 40 % of the reduction ascribed to sufficiency (Bourgeois et al. 
2023; Wiese et al. 2024a). Another regional scenario orientated to the demand side is provided 

--- PAGE 4 ---

Preprint 
4 
 
by Costa et al. (2021) for the EU+2 (the UK and Switzerland). They model a 43 % reduction in 
GHG emissions in the scenario with lifestyle changes compared to a baseline scenario. More than 
20 % of this reduction can be attributed to behavioural change/sufficiency. 
 
At the next level down, there are also a number of studies conducted at the country level. In the 
UK, the low-energy demand scenario by Barrett et al. (2022) models final energy consumption 
cut by 52 % compared to business-as-usual projections. The bottom-up modelling scenario 
offered by Bauer and Sterner (2025) for Germany shows a 61 % reduction in final energy 
consumption in 2050 compared to 2019 in the scenario which combines technological options 
with lifestyle changes. More European and country-specific reduction potentials for final energy 
demand and energy service parameters are compared in an analysis provided by Wiese et al. 
(2024b). 
 
In addition to differences in geographic scopes, studies on the saving potentials of sufficiency 
also differ in their thematic focus. Some studies focus on single sectors, some focus on a selection 
of consumption or lifestyle changes (if these changes include measures but not a specific way or 
policy instrument for achieving them, like reduction of living space or sharing economy, we call 
this cluster). Other studies analyse the potentials of single policy instruments or measures in 
detail. A few studies and their quantified saving potentials are presented here as examples: 
Gaspard et al. (2023) focus on the reduction of energy consumption in the buildings sector in 
France and model four scenarios, two of them with an explicit focus on sufficiency. The most 
ambitious one reduces energy consumption by 40 %, compared to the business-as-usual 
scenario in 2050. Based on a literature review, Ivanova et al. (2020) present GHG mitigation 
potentials for 61 consumption options, some of which involve sufficiency, in the food, transport 
and housing sector and for other consumption options, from a global perspective. The highest 
saving potential was identified for living car-free with a mean of more than 2 t CO2-eq./capita/a. 
Vita et al. (2019) modelled different green consumption and sufficiency options for Europe using 
a consumption-based perspective, also for different sectors, and compared them. They similarly 
accorded a mobility measure the highest saving potential: only bike and walk with 26 % lower 
carbon emissions than the baseline. Kreye et al. (2022) look at one very specific case of home 
office. They calculate the emission savings during the COVID-19 pandemic for Germany (almost 
4 Mt CO2-eq./a) and for two possible scenarios with greater or fewer days of working from home 
(almost 10 Mt CO2-eq./a for the ambitious case). Paar et al. (2023) performed an ex-post 
evaluation of cycling projects in German municipalities. The highest saving potential was identified 
for the city of Wuppertal with 3 kt CO2-eq./a for the years from 2020 and projected until 2045. 
 
We can see that there is a variety of existing quantifications of GHG and energy saving potentials 
from sufficiency or related concepts with very different geographic or thematic foci. Figure 1 shows 
this heterogeneity in the existing literature. 

--- PAGE 5 ---

Preprint 
5 
 
 
Fig. 1 Heterogeneity of saving potentials in the existing literature 
Legend: A circle stands for a study, a dot represents the quantified potential of a single measure. 
1.3. Research gap and aim of the study 
We have described the relevant mitigation potentials of sufficiency options. However, we also 
mentioned that sufficiency does not currently play a significant role in policy. Energy models and 
climate mitigation scenarios are powerful tools that can help decision-makers design policy 
strategies and concrete instruments (Süsser et al. 2021). One reason for the lack of policy 
attention may therefore be the fact that sufficiency is so far under-represented in energy and 
climate mitigation modelling (Samadi et al. 2017; Golinucci et al. 2025). 
 
In an expert workshop with German modellers and researchers, Zell-Ziegler and Förster (2018) 
found that modellers face a major hurdle in the form of a lack of available sufficiency saving 
potential data, which is scattered throughout the literature and difficult to find. McWilliams et al. 
(2025) add that another barrier to using existing data is the lack of harmonisation due to 
differences in units, assumptions and scales. Thus, as shown in the subchapter on existing 
potentials above, the research gap is not primarily about the lack of quantifications of sufficiency 
saving potentials, but rather its identification, structuring, harmonisation and synthesis. A 
subsequent research need is to analyse the existing data and highlight gaps for further exploration 
and research. 
 
The study aims to address these gaps by creating a structured database of harmonised 
sufficiency saving potentials (energy and GHG emissions), which will be made publicly available. 
The focus of the study was set at the national and measure-specific levels (“single potential” and 
“cluster” in Figure 1) because decarbonisation targets and modelled scenarios are primarily 
developed at the national level, while the implementation of climate change policy happens at the 
measure level. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---

Preprint 
6 
 
The article is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the methodology of the literature review, 
the creation and compilation of the database, the data harmonisation, the search for gaps and 
the presentation of results. The overall and sector-specific results are presented and discussed 
in section 3 followed by the data gap analysis. Finally, the main findings and recommendations 
(for future research) are presented in the conclusion (section 4). 
2. Material and Methods 
For this analysis, we performed a systematic literature review on energy sufficiency saving 
potentials. Our national case study focuses on Germany. In parallel, we conceptualised a 
database structure to curate the data and make the potentials comparable. We then filled it with 
the results of the literature review. To identify data gaps, we compared the database entries with 
an extensive list of sufficiency policy instruments. All underlying materials and methods are 
described in the following sections. 
2.1. Systematic literature review 
We conducted a systematic literature review (Tranfield et al. 2003) in the Web of Science Core 
Collection and in Google Scholar on May 25, 2023 in English and in German. From our research 
experience, we know that, at least in Germany, many applied research projects on sufficiency 
have not published their results in peer-reviewed journals, e. g. Fischer et al. (2016). Therefore, 
in addition to the scientific literature, we have also included grey literature in this review. 
We used the search string presented in Figure 2 (English) and the corresponding search string in 
German, see Figure 8 in the Appendix. 
 
Fig. 2 Search query 
The definition of the search string followed an iterative process: keywords like energy and 
sufficiency and the geographic focus on Germany were set from the beginning. Then we tried to 
paraphrase sufficiency with a combination of different terms which we took from relevant papers 
such as Sandberg (2021), Ivanova et al. (2020), IPCC (2022), Vita et al. (2019) and we checked 
whether suitable articles could be found. Additional search terms were incorporated to address 
the quantitative nature of the articles, meaning that actual quantified saving potentials should be 
provided. Finally, terms were added to exclude articles related to self-sufficiency and flexibility as 
these frequently produced irrelevant results. We only included articles and documents published 
from 2013 onwards. 

--- PAGE 7 ---

Preprint 
7 
 
We complemented this systematic literature review with additional papers published up to May 
2024. Therefore, we contacted the German and European communities on energy sufficiency via 
the mailinglists “Forschungsnetzwerk-Suffizienz”1 (German research network on sufficiency) and 
“ENOUGH network”2 in spring 2024 and screened the Zotero literature database of the ENOUGH 
network3 using the keywords German and Germany. Additional papers known to the authors or 
identified through snowball sampling were included if they were absent from the collection after 
completing these steps. This led to 430 papers from the systematic literature search and 85 
additional papers, see Figure 3. 
 
Fig. 3 PRISMA flow diagram on the systematic literature review based on Page et al. (2021) 
After removing duplicates and one paper published before 2013, we screened the abstracts of 
425 papers. The majority (84 %) were excluded because they did not meet the search criteria, 
e. g. they did not focus on energy sufficiency but used the key terms in other contexts. Another 
common reason was that the article mentioned Germany in the text but did not focus on it. 
This left 66 papers found in databases and 83 papers added by experts for a detailed screening. 
We clustered our decisions into include and used five exclusion criteria: no (sufficiency) 
 
1 https://lists.posteo.de/listinfo/forschungsnetzwerk-suffizienz 
2 ENOUGH is the International Network for Sufficiency Research & Policy, see its presentation: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330514884_Presentation_of_ENOUGH__the_International_Network_for_Sufficiency_Research_Policy 
3 https://www.zotero.org/groups/2119874/enough__international_network_for_sufficiency_research_and_policy/library 

--- PAGE 8 ---

Preprint 
8 
 
quantification, not Germany, no sufficiency measures, no quantification of policies or measures 
and potentials not related to energy. 102 reports (68 %) were excluded in this step. This resulted 
in 47 papers remaining for our analysis, 14 of which originated from the databases Web of 
Science and Google Scholar and 33 from the additions. 
These screening steps were performed by the team of eight authors. Inter-coder validity (see, for 
example, Olson et al. (2016)) was ensured through regular coder meetings to discuss inclusion / 
exclusion criteria and other questions. If coders were unsure about the inclusion or exclusion of 
a study, a second coder re-evaluated the abstract and/or study. 
2.2. Design of the database 
There is no comparable data collection available, so we structured the Sufficiency Potential 
Database from scratch. Every energy or GHG saving measure fills one row. Besides the name of 
the measure and its energy and/or GHG saving potential, we added a lot of contextual information 
/ metadata which is essential to ensure the understanding of the exact measure and its respective 
saving potential, thereby enhancing the usability of the data. As shown in chapter 1.2, the existing 
literature on potentials is very heterogeneous in terms of geographic and thematic scope. 
Additionally, the methods used, assumptions made, the years modelled etc. vary. Two types of 
contextual information on the potentials are important: 1) context information on the exact saving 
potential like the unit, the respective year to which it applies, a description of the measure and the 
relevant sector and 2) context information on how the saving potential was determined in the 
study, such as information on the type or quality (estimation, modelling result or ex-post 
evaluation) or the calculation method (territorial or consumption-based approach), which can 
explain why a potential is high or low. 
 
The design of the Sufficiency Potential Database followed an iterative process. The first potentials 
from about ten studies were extracted for testing in early 2023. The differences found for these 
studies and potentials led to the prototype of the database. Following discussions among the 
author team and external experts, the columns were amended and several new columns were 
added. The idea and the prototype were presented at two scientific conferences (NFDI4Energy 
conference and eceee Summer Study, both in 2024) and discussed with modellers and energy 
efficiency and sufficiency experts to assure its usability for the target group. The final structure of 
the database with all metadata as columns can be found in the Supplementary Information. 
 
To enhance comparability and visualisation of potentials, we clustered all database entries. The 
clustering was done sector-by-sector by screening all entries and deductively attributing clusters. 
We attributed a higher-level cluster (e. g. heat consumption) and a cluster (e. g. living space or 
heating behaviour) to each potential. Measures were categorised as single or combined based 
on the cluster. Entries linked to only one cluster were labeled as single, while 42 entries were 
classified as combined because they were attributed to two or more clusters (e. g. the reduction 
of motorised individual transport through more public transport and active mobility with the latter 
two being separate clusters). The single or combined column enables filtering, which allows for a 
focus on specific saving potentials, such as active mobility, without broader cluster overlaps. 

--- PAGE 9 ---

Preprint 
9 
 
There are two scopes of the database: the wide scope includes all saving potentials related to 
sufficiency. The narrow scope only includes entries classified as pure sufficiency without an 
overlap with other mitigation strategies and only those classified as single measures. 
 
The database was set up as a spreadsheet and can be found as Supplementary Information. 
2.3. Filling of the database and conversion steps 
All authors of this study filled the database with saving potentials from the identified 47 studies - 
per measure either energy or GHG savings or both, depending on the availability. All of the entries 
to the database were reviewed by a second person to ensure the quality of the entry and to 
streamline the wording. The definition of clusters was done by one author and revised by two 
others. 
 
The original values from the studies are provided in the sheet DB_original_values. To harmonise 
the entries and enhance comparability and usability, conversion steps were undertaken. The 
results can be found in the sheet DB_converted, the conversion factors in the sheet Conversion 
factors. The conversion included the following steps: 
● Calculating the average if minimum and maximum values were given. 
● Calculating yearly values if the saving potential was given as a cumulative value: division 
by number of years (under the simplified assumption of constant annual savings). 
● Converting the values for GHG mitigation potentials which were not given in Mt CO2-eq./a 
(only 2 % of entries remained which could not be converted due to units like potential per 
m²) to enable comparison of the entries in the same unit. 
● Converting values for energy saving potentials which were not given in TWh/a (we have 
only 7 % of entries left which could not be converted due to units like savings per m²) to 
enable comparison of the entries in the same unit. For the conversion of fuel units in litre 
or weight, we used the calorific values of petrol and diesel provided by the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT 2007). 
● Converting the twelve saving potentials that were given either per individual or per 
household, using the actual numbers for Germany from the Federal Statistical Office. 
 
The resulting curated database is the first of its kind and is intended as an openly accessible tool 
for modellers, policymakers and anyone involved in designing and implementing decarbonisation 
options. Although this version of the database has a national focus on Germany, it can serve as 
a blueprint for collections for other countries or be extended to other countries in the future. The 
structure of the database also provides guidance to researchers who quantify saving potentials 
by indicating what metadata are needed to effectively classify, compare and reuse their results. 
2.4. Gap analysis 
The Sufficiency Potential Database was analysed to identify gaps in the quantification of individual 
measures, e. g. to recommend foci to modellers for future analysis. As a reference, we used the 
European Sufficiency Policy Database (Zell-Ziegler et al. 2025), an extensive sufficiency policy 

--- PAGE 10 ---

Preprint 
10 
 
database with more than 350 entries and a focus on Germany and Europe. Firstly, we compared 
the sector-based entries of both databases and then compared the clusters of the Sufficiency 
Potential Database to the measures and actions in the policy database. This was followed by a 
detailed matching of Sufficiency Potential Database entries to specific policy instruments in the 
Sufficiency Policy Database (see Supplementary Information, DB_converted, columns AQ and 
AR). 
2.5. Presentation of results 
We summarise the saving potentials from a sectoral perspective and create corresponding 
figures. In doing so, we combine various distinguishing features: We always show the time scale 
and as a second factor, either the type of potential or the method of calculation. If all potentials 
have the same characteristics for these two factors, we only show the time scale and indicate the 
characteristics for these factors in the figure legend. 
 
We produce separate figures for energy and GHG savings. All figures only show the narrow scope 
of the sufficiency potentials (see definition in chapter 2.2). In the figures, only potentials with the 
unit we used for comparison (TWh/a or Mt CO2-eq./a) are shown. Additionally, only potentials for 
the national level are shown; these are valid for Germany as a whole. The very low local potentials 
are not included in the figures. For the figures on energy savings, we compare the potentials with 
the current final energy demand of the respective sector, retrieved from AGEB (2024) so as to 
categorise the level of the reduction potential. 
 
We use the higher-level clusters and clusters to structure the figures: the clusters are used as 
figure labels on the x-axis, the higher-level clusters are given after the cluster name in 
parentheses and structure the x-axis. The higher-level clusters are separated from each other 
optically by the vertical dashed lines. Comparisons of saving potentials make particular sense 
within higher-level clusters and within clusters. A comparison of different clusters needs to take 
the different scopes of the clusters into account (e. g. in the cases of appliances, it is difficult to 
compare the electricity savings achieved through sufficiency with broader measures such as 
remote working or natural carbon sequestration). 
 
Which exact measures and potentials lie behind each dot in the figures can be looked up in the 
database, see Supplementary Information (DB_converted), together with all metadata for this 
data point. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Overview of database entries 
Based on the literature review, the Sufficiency Potential Database (see Supplementary 
Information) was filled with findings from 47 literature sources. It contains 303 entries, 209 of 
which have a narrow scope (see definition in chapter 2.2). The 94 potentials that go beyond the 
narrow scope are included because of their valuable demand-side data. Six studies with 

--- PAGE 11 ---

Preprint 
11 
 
27 database entries explicitly explore combined potentials; these illustrate, for example, the 
interplay of sufficiency and efficiency, which often cannot be meaningfully separated. 
 
From the 47 literature sources, some contributed only a few entries, while others provided many 
more: For example, the German 2023 Projections Report by Harthan et al. (2023) contributed 
36 entries. 60 % of the entries fall within the narrow scope of our database, primarily in the 
industry / production and land-use & food sectors. The 36 entries are based on 15 measures, 
each of which have saving potentials for two to three points in time. The study by Fischer et al. 
(2016) contributed 32 entries; it focuses entirely on pure sufficiency and thus falls within our 
narrow scope and covers all sectors with quite detailed measures (e. g. behavioural measures 
like watch less TV). The data points of different studies differ in quite a lot of characteristics, that 
is why the metadata we provide with each potential like base year and calculation method is very 
important. In the following, numbers, percentages and the figures relate only to the narrow scope 
if not otherwise stated. 
 
The building sector accounts for the largest share of entries (41 %), with about a third focusing 
on appliances. This focus is based on the fact that there are few very detailed studies on 
sufficiency measures in this sector, resulting in a large number of (very detailed) entries in the 
database. 
 
64 % of entries contain GHG savings, compared to 49 % with energy savings, 12 % of the entries 
provide saving potentials on both metrics. GHG saving potentials are helpful for discussions on 
the policy level. Modellers need energy savings to integrate the sufficiency potentials into their 
models or rather activity levels like heated floor area or travelled kilometres. The latter lies outside 
the scope of our analysis and can be drawn from other papers like Wiese et al. (2024b). 
Beyond GHG and energy savings, about 20 % of the entries and 10 of the 47 studies included in 
this analysis provide additional metrics such as material savings, land use, costs, air quality, noise 
reduction, road accidents, toxicity, and acidification. These metrics are very helpful for 
emphasising the multi-solving nature of sufficiency, which is not just a decarbonisation strategy. 
It would be helpful if more studies provided such additional metrics. 
 
The database includes a broad range of saving potentials, from negligible to over 100 TWh or 
Mt CO₂-eq per year. Very notable energy saving measures in this regard include lowering per 
capita living space from 47 to 30 m2/person with an energy saving potential of 150 TWh/a 
(Bierwirth and Thomas 2019) and the measure car use instead of ownership (people with good 
public transport connections do without cars) with a saving potential of 104 TWh/a (Fischer et al. 
2016). Both potentials account for 15 % of the respective sector’s current final energy demand. 
Regarding GHG savings, sufficiency measures in buildings such as reduction of room 
temperature and optimising space use (with the per capita living space reducing from 50 to 
30 m²/person) show a substantial reduction potential; the combination of these measures enables 
savings of up to 118 Mt CO2-eq./a (Zimmermann 2018). 
 
Most of the database entries involve theoretical potentials (85 %), which are mainly derived from 
estimates and model simulations. This characteristic results in a high variability of saving 

--- PAGE 12 ---

Preprint 
12 
 
potentials due to different underlying assumptions. In contrast, realised potentials (quantified on 
the basis of ex-post evaluations) account for only 4 % (nine entries), six of which are visualised 
in the sectoral figures in the next subchapter and the Appendix. These realised saving potentials 
show rather small energy or GHG savings which is to be expected when compared to, for 
example, theoretical potentials. Ex-ante evaluations of implemented measures were only 
available in one paper (Paar et al. 2023), which focused on local cycling projects. Reports on 
bottom-up, already implemented measures like this are of special interest to local or regional 
administrations who are considering the adoption of measures that have already been empirically 
evaluated. It would thus be desirable to have more (ex-ante as well as ex-post) evaluations like 
this. The database entries cover all temporal scales, predominantly in the medium term (from 
2030 to 2039, 38 %), followed by entries on potentials valid for the years up to 2024 (labelled 
past, 33 %), long-term projections (post-2040, 24 %), and a few saving potentials for the short 
term (between 2025 and 2029, 4 %). 
 
In the course of the gap analysis (comparison of the database to the Sufficiency Policy Database), 
we identified how many of the measures are backed by a policy instrument4. This is because in 
many studies, decarbonisation measures are proposed without clarifying how they can be realised 
(Thema 2024). The corresponding share in the database is one third (34 %). None of the 
measures backed by a policy instrument is among the top saving measures (see mentioning of 
some above). 
3.2. Sectoral saving potentials 
This chapter presents the sectoral saving potentials. Chapter 2.5 provides explanations of how 
the results are presented in the figures. The five cross-sectoral saving potentials are not 
discussed in the following; the corresponding figures can be found in the Appendix (Figure 14). 
3.2.1. 
Building sector 
Energy-saving quantifications for the building sector rely exclusively on a territorial (non-LCA (life 
cycle assessment)) approach and comprise theoretical potentials. The database includes 
62 entries for energy reduction measures, predominantly in the clusters living space, heating 
behaviour, and appliances, see Figure 4. 
For appliances, reduction potentials range from small-scale measures, such as optimising 
ventilators and TVs (below 1 TWh/a), to more impactful measures targeting larger appliances like 
dryers and refrigerators or addressing multiple appliances within buildings (up to 19.8 TWh/a, see 
Fischer et al. (2013)). In the living space cluster, reducing average living space from 46.6 m² to 
30 m² per person yields the highest potential, saving 150 TWh/a (Bierwirth and Thomas 2019), 
which is equivalent to 15 % of the energy demand of the 2022 building sector in 2022. Less 
 
4 We use the following definitions on measures and policy instruments in this article: “Sufficiency 
measures are activities that lead to a verifiable, measurable or assessable reduction in environmental 
impacts. In contrast, sufficiency instruments are government interventions with the aim to promote the 
implementation of sufficiency measures” (translated based on Zell-Ziegler and Förster 2018). 

--- PAGE 13 ---

Preprint 
13 
 
ambitious measures, such as reductions to 40 m² per person, achieve 25.5 TWh/a (Fischer et al. 
2016), while those solely targeting specific household groups achieve only 0.02–0.2 TWh/a 
(Fischer et al. 2020). Measures targeting specific household groups (e. g. young couples, older 
people) also appear in the clusters energy consultation and downsizing. In the heating behaviour 
cluster, most measures focus on reducing room temperatures by 1–2°C for varying shares of 
buildings in Germany. 
 
Fig. 4 Energy saving potentials in the building sector. Characteristics of all potentials include 
territorial calculation method and type: theoretical. Final energy demand data for the year 2022 
was taken from AGEB (2024). 
The database includes GHG reduction potentials for 23 measures; LCA was used to calculate 
four of them and a territorial calculation approach was used to calculate the remainder, see 
Figure 9 in the Appendix. All comprise theoretical potentials, and most measures fall within the 
living space cluster.The top three reductions originate from a single source (Zimmermann 2018) 
and are attributed to immediate living space reductions (e. g. from 100 m² to 60 m² for two-person 
households, saving 52.2 Mt CO2-eq./a), ambitious heating behaviour changes (e. g. maintaining 
18°C room temperature with efficient ventilation, -51.3 Mt CO2-eq./a), and halving electricity 
demand (-32.3 Mt CO2-eq./a). 
For the living space cluster, ambition levels vary, ranging from the reduction to 60 m² for twoperson households by (Zimmermann 2018) mentioned above, to a 20 % decrease in per capita 
floor area by 2050 (-17.5 Mt CO2-eq./a) (Pauliuk and Heeren 2021) to zero net addition of floor 
area by 2030 (-7.6 Mt CO2-eq./a) (Thomas et al. 2019). Measures targeting small groups of 

--- PAGE 14 ---

Preprint 
14 
 
persons, such as house divisions with 0.5–1 % participation rates, achieve reductions as low as 
-0.04 Mt CO2-eq./a (Fischer et al. 2020). Due to higher penetration rates, long-term time horizons 
generally yield larger reduction potentials. 
3.2.2. 
Mobility sector 
The mobility sector includes a multitude of GHG saving potentials (40 measures), see Figure 5. 
Most of them can be ascribed to the higher-level cluster motorised individual transport. Five of 
the measures are calculated via consumption-based accounting and are valid for the target years 
2045 or 2050. The three highest saving potentials (ride sharing: 15.8 Mt CO2-eq./a, car sharing 
15.2 Mt CO2-eq./a and public transport 14 Mt CO2-eq./a) stem from the same LCA study (Prakash 
et al. 2023) in which all emissions from resource extraction, especially for electric vehicle 
batteries, to recycling are considered. The other LCA study (Pauliuk and Heeren 2021) also 
provides potentials on ride and car sharing, but they are significantly lower (3.4 Mt CO2-eq./a and 
1.2 Mt CO2-eq./a). The most likely reason for this discrepancy is that this study only examines a 
selection of materials like steel, aluminium and plastics. 
 
The different saving potentials relating to the speed limit can be explained by the different 
maximum speeds considered in the studies for different road types. For the mobility sector, 
realised and expected potentials are available, see Figure 10 in the Appendix. The realised one 
is the saving potential for remote work during the COVID-19 pandemic (Kreye et al. (2022); 
saving: 3.7 Mt CO2-eq./a). The difference to the very low potential from NPM (2019) can most 
likely be explained by the time at which the study was written or published, i. e. before or after the 
lockdowns when remote work became the new normal for many people. The highest remote work 
potential (9.6 Mt CO2-eq./a) is a theoretical one in Kreye et al. (2022), which assumes five more 
home office days compared to pre-Covid times for a 35 % remote work quota. 
The discrepancy within the reduce flights cluster is due to the different ambition level of the 
measures: in the one with a higher saving potential, private air travel is halved (Fischer et al. 
2016); in the other measure, inter-European short-haul flights are replaced when a rail trip to the 
same destination is no longer than four hours (Gaude et al. 2021). 
 
Fig. 5 GHG saving potentials in the mobility sector by calculation method. 

--- PAGE 15 ---

Preprint 
15 
 
All 17 energy saving potentials in this sector are theoretical ones based on a territorial calculation 
approach, see Figure 11 in the Appendix. They cover four higher-level clusters - the same as for 
the GHG savings but without freight transport and public transport. The highest saving potential 
is identified for remote work in a study published in 2016 (Fischer et al. 2016), which anticipated 
very ambitious remote working modes with 40 % fewer business trips. The saving potential of 
41.1 TWh/a is equivalent to nearly 6 % of the current energy consumption of the sector. 
3.2.3. 
Industry / production sector 
Energy savings in the industry / production sector range between 0.5 and 31 TWh (Eerma et al. 
2022). Five measures use a territorial approach, while two employ LCA methods, see Figure 12. 
Quantifications are either retrospective or for long-term horizons. Smaller and realised potentials 
are identified within the circular economy cluster, such as passenger spare part reuse, see 
Figure 6 (because the potentials are so close to each other, the four markings cannot be clearly 
distinguished). Larger savings stem from theoretical potentials on sharing economy initiatives (all 
products) and reducing production volumes of energy-intensive products (cluster material 
substitution). 
 
Fig. 6 Energy saving potentials in the industry / production sector by type of potential. Final energy 
demand data was used from AGEB (2024). 
The database identifies 15 measures, ten measures within the product lifetime cluster for GHG 
savings and one to two per other clusters, see Figure 13 in the Appendix. Except for one territorial 
quantification, all use an LCA approach and comprise theoretical potentials. 

--- PAGE 16 ---

Preprint 
16 
 
GHG reduction potentials vary widely, from 0.02–5.5 Mt CO₂eq./a for measures targeting specific 
product groups (e. g. lamps, furniture, household appliances) to 37.3 Mt CO₂eq./a for general 
product lifetime extensions (Zimmermann 2018). As with energy reductions, smaller reductions 
are associated with targeted product groups, while the highest potentials stem from broader 
lifetime extension measures across all products. 
3.2.4. 
Land-use and food sector 
The database includes 32 entries of GHG saving measures in the land-use and food sector. 
Energy saving does not play a role in this sector and all entries are theoretical potentials. In terms 
of methodology, a few studies are based on LCA; the majority, however, uses a territorial 
approach, see Figure 7. 
 
The potentials are grouped into three higher-level clusters. Most of the potentials can be identified 
for natural carbon sequestration and diet changes. Examples of potentials within the natural 
carbon sequestration cluster are a reduction of timber extraction from forests (68 Mt CO2-eq./a, 
Reise et al. 2024) and the rewetting of agricultural land on drained peat soils (22 Mt CO2-eq./a, 
Purr et al. 2021). 
 
For the diet change cluster, the entry with the highest saving potential (28.7 Mt CO2-eq./a, 
Prakash et al. 2023) is the most ambitious assumed diet change, with the Planetary Health Diet 
(PHD) realised by 2045. 
 
 
Fig. 7 GHG saving potentials in the land-use and food sector by calculation method 
Characteristics of all potentials include type: theoretical. 

--- PAGE 17 ---

Preprint 
17 
 
3.3. Gap analysis 
As described in the methods section (chapter 2.4), we compared the entries of the potential 
database (wide scope) with the European Sufficiency Policy Database (Zell-Ziegler et al. 2025) 
to identify whether there are gaps in sufficiency quantification which future research can close. 
As the policy database only lists policy instruments, and the potential database includes all kinds 
of measures (66 % of them not directly linked to a policy instrument), the comparison at this level 
of detail is somewhat limited. Yet, the policy database includes policy targets and measures or 
actions that were compared to the clusters of the potential database. 
As described above, in the Potential Database, most of the entries relate to the building sector. 
Many of these are behavioural changes, such as downsizing appliances or reducing heating, and 
there is no mention of whether they were voluntary or driven by policy instruments. The same is 
true for the entries on reduced living space, although there are many instruments to promote a 
reduction in living space, as shown in the Policy Database. Thus, in future assessments, the 
potentials could be better linked to policy instruments. With the exception of the measure or action 
category vertical densification of the Policy Database, we found a wide range of possible 
sufficiency measures quantified in this sector. 
Most Policy Database entries focus on the mobility sector and are highly detailed. The quantified 
entries in the Potential Database lack this level of granularity, particularly for public transport. 
Future quantifications could disaggregate the savings further and explore savings from measures 
like reducing parking, car-free city centres, city tolls and walking. Currently, the potentials 
emphasise speed limits and cycling. 
In the industry and production sector, we identified many potentials in the area of circular 
economy, which is a very broad field. Potentials were lacking on product labelling and regional 
economy or local production. 
In the land-use and food sector, we are also lacking savings from the local production of food and 
feed, and there is a gap in the saving potential from reducing fertiliser use. Similar to measures 
in the building sector, the potential for dietary changes is often assumed without concrete policy 
instruments for changing eating habits. However, when pointing out gaps in this area, it should 
be noted that the land use and food sector is a long way from energy sufficiency and that many 
potentials and literature sources may not have been identified by our query. 
Since cross-sectoral and more systemic sufficiency potentials were not the focus of this literature 
review, it is not surprising that the share of cross-sectoral policy instruments with corresponding 
quantification is relatively low. However, systemic cross-sectoral policies are very important and 
effective (Babiker et al. 2022) and should thus also be examined further. 

--- PAGE 18 ---

Preprint 
18 
 
3.4. Discussion of results 
Through the literature review, we have identified the existing saving potentials for different sectors 
and clusters scattered throughout the literature. We then systematised these findings in one place 
and made them comparable by harmonising the units. However, despite this harmonisation, 
comparing the different saving potentials remains challenging, even for the same measure (e. g. 
speed limit or dietary change). This is because the potentials are heterogeneous in terms of 
factors such as time horizon, calculation method, type of potential, and relation to a baseline or 
reference value. 
 
It became clear to the authors that the database needs a comprehensive set of metadata for each 
saving potential. Such metadata is essential for accurately presenting and comparing potentials 
as it highlights the key differences between them. The database created attempts to capture as 
much of the relevant metadata as possible in the different defined columns (see chapter 2.2) and 
additional commentary columns. However, the database can only be as precise as the primary 
sources are. Yet, there are much more relevant assumptions made in the studies that could not 
be collected in the database because they are, in most cases, not explicitly described in the 
studies. These assumptions either relate to (political) context and (normative) background or are 
underlying assumptions that influenced the resulting saving potentials. There is a need for more 
transparency and metadata to understand the assumptions behind quantified saving potentials. 
 
We found that all potentials based on theoretical assumptions are higher than realised or 
expected potentials within a cluster, which is plausible. Potentials resulting from a consumptionbased approach tend to be higher than those from a territorial approach, which is also plausible. 
Moreover, we found that for all sectors, the temporal scale was related to the level of savings to 
a minor extent. 
 
Very robust saving potentials result from ex-post evaluations but the share of this data is low in 
the database (4 %). This is not surprising because sufficiency does not play a large role in current 
politics (Zell-Ziegler et al. 2021) and, as a result, there are not many implemented measures that 
can be evaluated. This underscores the importance of evaluating existing sufficiency projects and 
calculating their saving potentials. 
The potentials also greatly differ in terms of the scope they cover, e. g. all household appliances 
in all German households or just fridges in households that include people over 60 years of age. 
The often narrow perspective may explain why some of the potentials are very low. For example, 
Fischer et al. (2020) examined very specific potentials for small target groups such as ‘young 
couples starting a family’ or ‘older households in [their] own home’. Some potentials are only given 
for the local level like the municipal cycling projects in Paar et al. (2023) and some are only valid 
for very specific product groups like ‘passenger car spare parts’ in McKenna et al. (2013). These 
results show that sufficiency interventions often happen at small scales and can be quantified at 
this level of detail. This leads to the conclusion that sufficiency measures need to be scaled-up 
by businesses, politics or other actors and combined with each other or efficiency and consistency 
measures to realise their full potential. 

--- PAGE 19 ---

Preprint 
19 
 
Despite the described differences influencing the calculated saving potentials, the database 
provides insights into potential savings from sufficiency measures, guiding discussion on 
mitigation options beyond renewable energy deployment and energy efficiency. In this regard, our 
study links with others like the comparison of energy service demand indicators of different 
sufficiency scenarios by Wiese et al. (2024b) – the data presented in this study is also very useful 
to energy modellers and can, if applied in scenarios, result in energy and GHG saving potentials. 
The more saving potentials are added to the database in the future, the more robust insights 
regarding the potentials will become. This Sufficiency Potential Database can then better inform 
decision-makers and serve as a stronger foundation for energy modellers. 
 
The systematic review showed that it is very difficult to catch relevant literature on quantified 
energy sufficiency measures via a quite simple search string. Most of the literature sources that 
led to entries in the Sufficiency Potential Database were known by the authors or their networks 
or added through snowball sampling. This is due to the fact that the term sufficiency is often not 
explicitly used in the literature sources. Rather, it is paraphrased as, for example, ‘efficient use of 
living space’ or is not necessary when talking about some sufficiency measures, e. g. for the 
promotion of public transport. To make the potential saving of energy sufficiency visible, it would 
be beneficial if common language would be used. If not, it remains a small-scale task to identify 
the relevant literature sources. Another issue is that almost three quarters of the literature sources 
used for the database is grey literature and thus it is unclear how the quality was ensured. There 
can be different reasons for this. Energy sufficiency measures are not yet widely implemented, 
leading to a lack of data for peer-reviewed studies. Additionally, the scientific community has not 
yet focused heavily on sufficiency as a mitigation option. Furthermore, studies on saving 
potentials are often commissioned by administrations or NGOs, for whom scientific publications 
may not be a priority. 
 
Overall, it would be beneficial to include different communities and networks in the future 
expansion of the database to incorporate many more potentials from different fields. The current 
database provides a starting point for this. 
4. Conclusions 
We have established a novel, openly available database with sufficiency saving potentials for 
GHG emissions and energy consumption for Germany. The literature review which fed the 
database led to 47 relevant sources from which we extracted 303 unique saving potentials. This 
demonstrates that quantified saving potentials are available in the literature and can be used by 
modellers and policymakers. We also believe that there are many more quantified saving 
potentials in the literature that were not identified through our query and expert networks. The 
database makes access, comparison and the use of data easy, particularly because it provides a 
conversion of all possible potentials to the same unit and a great amount of metadata. 
Most quantifications were identified for the building sector (41 %), especially in the appliances 
cluster. The highest saving potential identified in the literature was for lowering the per capita 

--- PAGE 20 ---

Preprint 
20 
 
living space to 30 m2/person (150 TWh/a) and the second highest was for a combination of car 
sharing and public transport use (104 TWh/a). Both saving potentials are equivalent to 15 % of 
the current respective sectoral final energy demand. We thus confirm the high saving potentials 
stated in other review studies like IPCC (2022). Regarding GHG savings, the highest potential 
given in the literature was for a combination of reducing room temperature and optimising space 
use (118 Mt CO2-eq./a). The reduction of living space / the effective use of space has thus the 
highest energy and GHG reduction potential within our database. 
The database structure highlights the key metadata that enables saving potential data to be used 
further. These are especially assumptions on the reference scenario, if applicable, on the scope 
of calculation (territorial or consumption-based accounting) and on the type of the potential 
(theoretical - including technical and economic ones, expected or realised). Moreover, the saving 
measure itself (for sufficiency mainly the change of activity levels) needs to be described in detail. 
More open and transparent data provision or a standard for metadata on studies including saving 
potentials would be helpful5. 
The database is intended to be extendable or to serve as a blueprint. This means that more saving 
potentials for Germany and for other countries can be added or a similar database in other 
geographical contexts can be set up. An extension will make it more useful and lead to more 
robust potentials for the clusters. A starting point for modellers and researchers can be to fill the 
gaps identified: more disaggregated potentials for the mobility sector and more potentials on 
regional economies. To equalise the imbalance of the current database, it would be useful to have 
more studies that use a consumption-based approach (LCA method) and more bottom-up 
calculations that can also be used on local and regional levels, which often want to or could 
implement sufficiency. Backing the quantified measures by concrete policy instruments seems 
favourable as well. Furthermore, we need more evidence from ex-post evaluations of 
implemented sufficiency measures and a better link of GHG and energy saving potentials with 
other potentials such as job creation, biodiversity conservation, land use etc. 
In summary, we expect the database to be useful for researchers and modellers as input for 
energy and climate scenarios and as a reference to which they could add new findings. For 
policymakers, we expect the database to help with identifying the potentials of energy sufficiency, 
design policy instruments to realise the potential and implement sufficiency as part of the energy 
transition and decarbonisation. 
 
References 
 
AGEB (2024) Bilanz 2022 as of March 6, 2024 
Akenji L (2014) Consumer scapegoatism and limits to green consumerism. J Clean Prod 63:13–
 
5 Discussions, ideas and efforts in this direction can be found in these publications: Hülk et al. 2018; 
Speck et al. 2023; Dioha et al. 2023; Grether et al. 2024 

--- PAGE 21 ---

Preprint 
21 
 
23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.05.022 
Babiker M, Berndes G, Blok K, et al (2022) Cross-sectoral perspectives. In: IPCC, 2022: Climate 
Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. p 220 pp. 
Barrett J, Pye S, Betts-Davies S, et al (2022) Energy demand reduction options for meeting 
national zero-emission targets in the United Kingdom. Nat Energy 7:726–735. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01057-y 
Bauer F, Sterner M (2025) Impacts of lifestyle changes on energy demand and greenhouse gas 
emissions 
in 
Germany. 
Renew 
Sustain 
Energy 
Rev 
207:114944. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2024.114944 
Bierwirth A, Thomas S (2019) Energy sufficiency in buildings: concept paper. ECEEE 
Bourgeois S, Taillard N, Balembois É, et al (2023) Climate neutrality, Energy security and 
Sustainability: A pathway to bridge the gap through Sufficiency, Efficiency and 
Renewables. négaWatt Association 
Costa L, Moreau V, Thurm B, et al (2021) The decarbonisation of Europe powered by lifestyle 
changes. Environ Res Lett 16:044057. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abe890 
Creutzig F, Niamir L, Bai X, et al (2022a) Demand-side solutions to climate change mitigation 
consistent 
with 
high 
levels 
of 
well-being. 
Nat 
Clim 
Change 
12:36–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01219-y 
Creutzig F, Roy J, Devine-Wright P, et al (2022b) Demand, Services and Social Aspects of 
Mitigation. In: IPCC, 2022: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change 
Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, pp 503–612 
Creutzig F, Roy J, Minx J (2024) Demand-side climate change mitigation: where do we stand and 
where do we go? Environ Res Lett 19:040201. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ad33d3 
Dablander F, Hickey C, Sandberg M, et al (2025) Embracing sufficiency to accelerate the energy 
transition. Energy Res Soc Sci 120:103907 
Darby S, Fawcett T (2018) Energy sufficiency: an introduction. European Council for an energy 
efficient economy (ECEEE), Oxford 
Dioha MO, Montgomery M, Almada R, et al (2023) Beyond dollars and cents: why socio-political 
factors 
matter 
in 
energy 
system 
modeling. 
Environ 
Res 
Lett 
18:121002. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ad0a54 
Eerma MH, Manning D, Økland GL, et al (2022) The potential of behavioral changes to achieve 
a fully renewable energy system - A case study for Germany. Renew Sustain Energy 
Transit 2:100028. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rset.2022.100028 
Fischer C, Blanck R, Brohmann B, et al (2016) Konzept zur absoluten Verminderung des 
Energiebedarfs: Potenziale, Rahmenbedingungen und Instrumente zur Erreichung der 

--- PAGE 22 ---

Preprint 
22 
 
Energieverbrauchsziele des Energiekonzepts 
Fischer C, Cludius J, Förster H, et al (2020) Möglichkeiten der Instrumentierung von 
Energieverbrauchsreduktion 
durch 
Verhaltensänderung. 
Dessau-Roßlau 
Umweltbundesamt 
Available 
Online 
Httpswww 
Umweltbundesamt 
Desitesdefaultfilesmedien1410publikationen2020-05-06texte56-2020 
Energieverbrauchsreduktionpdf 9:2022 
Fischer C, Grießhammer R, Barth R, et al (2013) Mehr als nur weniger. Suffizienz: Begriff, 
Begründung und Potenziale 
Gaspard A, Chateau L, Laruelle C, et al (2023) Introducing sufficiency in the building sector in 
net-zero 
scenarios 
for 
France. 
Energy 
Build 
278:112590. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2022.112590 
Gaude A, Körner L, Wenzl C (2021) Die Potenziale von Suffizienz-Politik heben: Zahlen, Fakten, 
Hintergründe für Mobilität, Ernährung, Wohnen. Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz 
Deutschland e.V. 
Golinucci N, Rocco MV, Prina MG, et al (2025) The role of sufficiency measures in a 
decarbonizing 
Europe. 
Ecol 
Econ 
235:108645. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2025.108645 
Grether RL, Schäfer M, Qussous R, et al (2024) Representation of societal and political factors in 
long-term energy system scenarios 
Grubler A, Wilson C, Bento N, et al (2018) A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5 °C 
target and sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies. Nat 
Energy 3:515–527. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0172-6 
Harthan RO, Förster H, Borkowski K, et al (2023) Projektionsbericht 2023 für Deutschland. 
Umweltbundesamt 
Hülk L, Müller B, Glauer M, et al (2018) Transparency, reproducibility, and quality of energy 
system analyses – A process to improve scientific work. Energy Strategy Rev 22:264–
269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2018.08.014 
IPCC (2022) Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change - Summary for Policymakers. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Ivanova D, Barrett J, Wiedenhofer D, et al (2020) Quantifying the potential for climate change 
mitigation 
of 
consumption 
options. 
Environ 
Res 
Lett 
15:093001. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab8589 
Jungell-Michelsson J, Heikkurinen P (2022) Sufficiency: A systematic literature review. Ecol Econ 
195:107380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2022.107380 
Kreye K, Kampffmeyer N, Scherf C-S, Weber M (2022) Arbeiten im Homeoffice – gut für die 
Umwelt und die Mitarbeiter:innen? 
Lage J (2022) Sufficiency and transformation–A semi-systematic literature review of notions of 

--- PAGE 23 ---

Preprint 
23 
 
social change in different concepts of sufficiency. Front Sustain 3:954660. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/frsus.2022.954660 
Lage J, Thema J, Zell-Ziegler C, et al (2023) Citizens call for sufficiency and regulation — A 
comparison of European citizen assemblies and National Energy and Climate Plans. 
Energy Res Soc Sci 104:103254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2023.103254 
Lorek S, Spangenberg JH (2014) Sustainable consumption within a sustainable economy – 
beyond 
green 
growth 
and 
green 
economies. 
J 
Clean 
Prod 
63:33–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.08.045 
McKenna R, Reith S, Cail S, et al (2013) Energy savings through direct secondary reuse: an 
exemplary analysis of the German automotive sector. J Clean Prod 52:103–112. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.02.032 
McWilliams B, Tagliapietra S, Zachmann G (2025) Europe’s energy information problem. Bruegel 
MIT 
(2007) 
Units 
& 
Conversions 
Fact 
Sheet. 
https://indico.ictp.it/event/8008/session/3/contribution/23/material/slides/2.pdf 
NPM (2019) Wege zur Erreichung der Klimaziele 2030 im Verkehrssektor. Bundesministerium für 
Verkehr und digitale Infrastruktur 
Olson J, McAllister C, Grinnell L, et al (2016) Applying Constant Comparative Method with Multiple 
Investigators and Inter-Coder Reliability. Qual Rep. https://doi.org/10.46743/21603715/2016.2447 
Paar A, Thomé C, Liste V, Repenning J (2023) Evaluation 2020/2021 des Förderaufrufs 
„Klimaschutz durch Radverkehr“ im Rahmen der Nationalen Klimaschutzinitiative (NKI). 
Öko-Institut und ifeu 
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, et al (2021) The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated 
guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ n71. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71 
Pauliuk S, Heeren N (2021) Material efficiency and its contribution to climate change mitigation in 
Germany: A deep decarbonization scenario analysis until 2060. J Ind Ecol 25:479–493. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13091 
Piketty T, Chancel L (2015) Carbon and inequality: from Kyoto to Paris. Trends Glob Inequal 
Carbon Emiss 1998-2013 Prospects Equitable Adapt Fund Paris Paris Sch Econ 
Prakash S, Löw C, Antony F, et al (2023) Modell Deutschland Circular Economy. Modellierung 
und Folgenabschätzung einer Circular Economy in 9 Sektoren in Deutschland 
Purr K, Wehnemann K, Balzer F, et al (2021) Treibhausgasminderung um 70 Prozent bis 2030: 
So kann es gehen! Umweltbundesamt, Dessau-Roßlau 
Reise J, Hennenberg K, Benndorf A, Böttcher H (2024) Klimaschutzmaßnahmen im LULUCFSektor: Potenziale und Sensitivitäten 
Roy J, Some S, Das N, Pathak M (2021) Demand side climate change mitigation actions and 

--- PAGE 24 ---

Preprint 
24 
 
SDGs: literature review with systematic evidence search. Environ Res Lett 16:043003. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abd81a 
Samadi S, Gröne M-C, Schneidewind U, et al (2017) Sufficiency in energy scenario studies: 
Taking the potential benefits of lifestyle changes into account. Technol Forecast Soc 
Change 124:126–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.09.013 
Sandberg M (2021) Sufficiency transitions: A review of consumption changes for environmental 
sustainability. J Clean Prod 293:126097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126097 
Speck C, Jaquart P, Weinhardt C, et al (2023) Transparency and Involvement of Society and 
Policy 
in 
a 
Data 
Sharing 
Platform. 
Proc 
Conf 
Res 
Data 
Infrastruct 
1:. 
https://doi.org/10.52825/cordi.v1i.327 
SRU (2024) Suffizienz als „Strategie des Genug“: Eine Einladung zur Diskussion 
Sugiyama M, Wilson C, Wiedenhofer D, et al (2024) High with low: Harnessing the power of 
demand-side solutions for high wellbeing with low energy and material demand. Joule 
8:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2023.12.014 
Süsser D, Ceglarz A, Gaschnig H, et al (2021) Model-based policymaking or policy-based 
modelling? How energy models and energy policy interact. Energy Res Soc Sci 
75:101984. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.101984 
Thema J (2024) Modelling policy scenarios: refocussing the model-policy logic for the case of 
German passenger transport. Energy Sustain Soc 14:38. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13705024-00467-y 
Thomas S, Thema J, Brischke L-A, et al (2019) Energy sufficiency policy for residential electricity 
use 
and 
per-capita 
dwelling 
size. 
Energy 
Effic 
12:1123–1149. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-018-9727-4 
Tranfield D, Denyer D, Smart P (2003) Towards a Methodology for Developing Evidence‐Informed 
Management Knowledge by Means of Systematic Review. Br J Manag 14:207–222. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 
van Den Berg NJ, Hof AF, Timmer V, et al (2024) (Path)ways to sustainable living: The impact of 
the SLIM scenarios on long-term emissions. Glob Environ Change 84:102774. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2023.102774 
Vita G, Lundström JR, Hertwich EG, et al (2019) The Environmental Impact of Green 
Consumption and Sufficiency Lifestyles Scenarios in Europe: Connecting Local 
Sustainability 
Visions 
to 
Global 
Consequences. 
Ecol 
Econ 
164:106322. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.05.002 
Wachsmuth J, Duscha V (2019) Achievability of the Paris targets in the EU—the role of demandside-driven mitigation in different types of scenarios. Energy Effic 12:403–421. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-018-9670-4 
Wiese F, Taillard N, Balembois E, et al (2024a) The key role of sufficiency for low demand-based 
carbon neutrality and energy security across Europe. Nat Commun 15:9043. 

--- PAGE 25 ---

Preprint 
25 
 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53393-0 
Wiese F, Thema J, Cordroch L (2022) Strategies for climate neutrality. Lessons from a metaanalysis of German energy scenarios. Renew Sustain Energy Transit 2:100015. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rset.2021.100015 
Wiese F, Zell-Ziegler C, Burghardt C, et al (2024b) Reducing demand: a quantitative analysis of 
energy service demand indicators in sufficiency-oriented scenarios. Environ Res Commun 
6:121003. https://doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/ad966e 
Wuppertal Institut (2023) Suffizienzpolitik als Booster zum Erreichen der Klimaschutzziele. 
Wuppertal 
Zell-Ziegler C, Best B, Thema J, et al (2025) Energy Sufficiency Policy Database [Data set] 
Zell-Ziegler C, Förster H (2018) Mit Suffizienz mehr Klimaschutz modellieren. Umweltbundesamt, 
Dessau 
Zell-Ziegler C, Thema J, Best B, et al (2021) Enough? The role of sufficiency in European energy 
and 
climate 
plans. 
Energy 
Policy 
157:112483. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2021.112483 
Zimmermann P (2018) Bewertbarkeit und ökobilanzieller Einfluss von Suffizienz im 
Gebäudebereich 
 
Appendix 
 
Fig. 8 Search query for the German search 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---

Preprint 
26 
 
 
Fig. 9 GHG saving potentials in the buildings sector by calculation method. Characteristics of all 
potentials include type: theoretical. 
 
Fig. 10 GHG saving potentials in the mobility sector by type of potential 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---

Preprint 
27 
 
 
Fig. 11 Energy saving potentials in the mobility sector. Characteristics of all potentials include 
territorial calculation method and type: theoretical. Final energy demand data for 2022 was taken 
from AGEB (AGEB 2024). 
 
Fig. 12 Energy saving potentials in the industry / production sector. Final energy demand data for 
2022 was taken from AGEB (AGEB 2024). 

--- PAGE 28 ---

Preprint 
28 
 
 
Fig. 13 GHG saving potentials in the industry / production sector by type of potential 
 
Fig. 14 Cross-sectoral GHG saving potentials by type of potential. Characteristics of all potentials 
include territorial calculation method and type: theoretical. 
 

--- PAGE 29 ---

Preprint 
29 
 
Supplementary Information: Sufficiency Potential Database for 
Germany (xlsx.-file) 
The database is also available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14779100 
 
 
Acknowledgements: 
This work was inspired by the Energy Demand Changes Induced by Technological and Social 
Innovations (EDITS) network, an initiative coordinated by the Research Institute of Innovative 
Technology for the Earth (RITE) and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
(IIASA) and funded by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Japan. 
We thank Prof. Dr. Stefan Heiland, Technische Universität Berlin, for fruitful discussions and 
helpful feedback on the concept, methods and results of this paper. We thank Dr. Vanessa Cook, 
Oeko-Institut Berlin, for her excellent proof-reading. 
 
Funding: 
This research was conducted as part of the research project ‘The role of energy sufficiency in 
energy transition and society’ funded by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology 
and Space (BMFTR), within the framework of the Strategy Research for Sustainability (FONA), 
as part of its Social-Ecological Research funding priority [grant numbers 01UU2004C (CZZ and 
KD), 01UU2004B (DS) and 01UU2004A (FW)]. CB acknowledges funding from the doctoral 
scholarship programme of Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt (DBU). MS would like to thank the 
German Federal Government, the German State Governments, and the Joint Science 
Conference (GWK) for their funding and support as part of the “NFDI4Energy” consortium. The 
work was (partially) funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG)—501865131 within the 
German National Research Data Infrastructure. 
Responsibility for the content of this publication lies with the authors.